Title IX of the  Education Amendments of 1972 (Title IX) prohibits discrimination based on sex  in education programs and activities that receive federal financial assistance.  Title IX states “No person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be  excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to  discrimination under any education program or activity receiving Federal  financial assistance[.]” All federal agencies that provide grants of financial  assistance are required to enforce Title IX’s nondiscrimination mandate. The  U.S. Department of Education (Department) gives grants of financial assistance  to schools and colleges and to certain other entities, including vocational  rehabilitation programs and libraries.
In 1975, the  Department’s predecessor, the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, issued  final regulations implementing Title IX. Recently, the Department engaged in notice-and-comment  rulemaking to formally amend the Title IX regulations for the first time in  over 40 years. After reviewing over 124,000 public comments, the Department  issued final Title IX regulations on May 6, 2020. The new Title IX regulation,  which is codified in the Code of Federal Regulations at 34 CFR Part 106, is enforced by the Department’s Office for Civil Rights (OCR).
Examples of the types  of discrimination that are covered under Title IX include sexual harassment;  the failure to provide equal athletic opportunity; sex-based discrimination in  a school’s science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) courses and  programs; and discrimination based on pregnancy. A fuller list of Title IX  issues OCR addresses appears here.
Title IX also prohibits  retaliation for filing an OCR complaint or for advocating for a right protected  by Title IX and discrimination in employment which is based on sex. However, employment  discrimination complaints filed with OCR are generally referred to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
On June 23, 2022, the U.S. Department of Education released for public comment its proposed amendments to the Department’s regulations implementing Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972. The proposed amendments reflect the Department’s continued commitment to ensuring that federally funded education programs and activities are free from all forms of sex discrimination, including discrimination on the basis of sex stereotypes, sex characteristics, pregnancy or related conditions, sexual orientation, and gender identity. The proposed amendments also reflect the Department’s continued commitment to secure equal opportunity, combat sexual harassment and sexual violence, and provide clear and fair procedures for students, educators, and others involved in America’s education system to address sex discrimination in schools and on campuses. This notice was published by the Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights at 87 Fed. Reg. 41390 (July 12, 2022). The comment period for this notice of proposed rulemaking has closed. In addition, the Department has released a fact sheet and a summary of the major provisions of the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking.
On April 6, 2023, the U.S. Department of Education released for public comment its proposed amendment to the Department’s regulation implementing Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972. The proposed amendment aims to advance Title IX’s longstanding goal of ensuring equal opportunity in athletics and would provide much needed clarity for students, parents, coaches, and schools. The unofficial version of the proposed Title IX regulation is available here. The NPRM was published in the Federal Register on April 13, 2023, and is available here. You may submit comments through the Federal eRulemaking Portal here. The Department’s notice of proposed rulemaking will be open for public comment until May 15, 2023. In addition, the Department has released a fact sheet on the notice of proposed rulemaking.
For additional information about the Department’s current Title IX regulations, please see OCR’s Questions and Answers resource and related appendix on the Title IX Regulations on Sexual Harassment.  The Q&A clarifies how OCR interprets schools’ existing obligations under the 2020 regulations, including the areas in which schools have discretion in their procedures for responding to reports of sexual harassment. The appendix provides examples of Title IX procedures that schools may find helpful in implementing the 2020 regulations and can adapt to their own circumstances.  Please also note that OCR issued a Letter to Students, Educators, and other Stakeholders re Victim Rights Law Center et al. v. Cardona (Aug. 24, 2021) addressing one provision of the current regulations.
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
Title IX of the  Education Amendments of 1972 (Title IX) prohibits discrimination based on sex  in education programs and activities that receive federal financial assistance.  Title IX states “No person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be  excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to  discrimination under any education program or activity receiving Federal  financial assistance[.]” All federal agencies that provide grants of financial  assistance are required to enforce Title IX’s nondiscrimination mandate. The  U.S. Department of Education (Department) gives grants of financial assistance  to schools and colleges and to certain other entities, including vocational  rehabilitation programs and libraries.
In 1975, the  Department’s predecessor, the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, issued  final regulations implementing Title IX. Recently, the Department engaged in notice-and-comment  rulemaking to formally amend the Title IX regulations for the first time in  over 40 years. After reviewing over 124,000 public comments, the Department  issued final Title IX regulations on May 6, 2020. The new Title IX regulation,  which is codified in the Code of Federal Regulations at 34 CFR Part 106, is enforced by the Department’s Office for Civil Rights (OCR).
Examples of the types  of discrimination that are covered under Title IX include sexual harassment;  the failure to provide equal athletic opportunity; sex-based discrimination in  a school’s science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) courses and  programs; and discrimination based on pregnancy. A fuller list of Title IX  issues OCR addresses appears here.
Title IX also prohibits  retaliation for filing an OCR complaint or for advocating for a right protected  by Title IX and discrimination in employment which is based on sex. However, employment  discrimination complaints filed with OCR are generally referred to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
On June 23, 2022, the U.S. Department of Education released for public comment its proposed amendments to the Department’s regulations implementing Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972. The proposed amendments reflect the Department’s continued commitment to ensuring that federally funded education programs and activities are free from all forms of sex discrimination, including discrimination on the basis of sex stereotypes, sex characteristics, pregnancy or related conditions, sexual orientation, and gender identity. The proposed amendments also reflect the Department’s continued commitment to secure equal opportunity, combat sexual harassment and sexual violence, and provide clear and fair procedures for students, educators, and others involved in America’s education system to address sex discrimination in schools and on campuses. This notice was published by the Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights at 87 Fed. Reg. 41390 (July 12, 2022). The comment period for this notice of proposed rulemaking has closed. In addition, the Department has released a fact sheet and a summary of the major provisions of the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking.
On April 6, 2023, the U.S. Department of Education released for public comment its proposed amendment to the Department’s regulation implementing Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972. The proposed amendment aims to advance Title IX’s longstanding goal of ensuring equal opportunity in athletics and would provide much needed clarity for students, parents, coaches, and schools. The unofficial version of the proposed Title IX regulation is available here. The NPRM was published in the Federal Register on April 13, 2023, and is available here. You may submit comments through the Federal eRulemaking Portal here. The Department’s notice of proposed rulemaking will be open for public comment until May 15, 2023. In addition, the Department has released a fact sheet on the notice of proposed rulemaking.
For additional information about the Department’s current Title IX regulations, please see OCR’s Questions and Answers resource and related appendix on the Title IX Regulations on Sexual Harassment.  The Q&A clarifies how OCR interprets schools’ existing obligations under the 2020 regulations, including the areas in which schools have discretion in their procedures for responding to reports of sexual harassment. The appendix provides examples of Title IX procedures that schools may find helpful in implementing the 2020 regulations and can adapt to their own circumstances.  Please also note that OCR issued a Letter to Students, Educators, and other Stakeholders re Victim Rights Law Center et al. v. Cardona (Aug. 24, 2021) addressing one provision of the current regulations.
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
Biden-Harris Administration Releases Final Rules that Strengthen Accountability for Colleges and Consumer Protection for Students
U.S. Department of Education’s Office for Civil Rights Announces Resolution of Sex-Based Harassment Investigation of Taft College in California
Biden-Harris Administration Awards $14 Million Under First-Ever Fostering Diverse Schools Demonstration Grant Program
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Legislation, regulations, guidance, and other policy documents can be found here for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), and other topics.
Please note that in the U.S., the federal role in education is limited. Because of the Tenth Amendment, most education policy is decided at the state and local levels.  So, if you have a question about a policy or issue, you may want to check with the relevant organization in your state or school district.
Text of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, as amended through 12/27/22:  PDF (1.2M) |  Text (3.3M)
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
Due to aggressive automated scraping of FederalRegister.gov and eCFR.gov, programmatic access to these sites is limited to access to our extensive developer APIs.
If you are human user receiving this message, we can add your IP address to a set of IPs that can access FederalRegister.gov & eCFR.gov; complete the CAPTCHA (bot test) below and click "Request Access". This process will be necessary for each IP address you wish to access the site from, requests are valid for approximately one quarter (three months) after which the process may need to be repeated.
If you want to request a wider IP range, first request access for your current IP, and then use the "Site Feedback" button found in the lower left-hand side to make the request.
Newly updated resource document explains how the ADA applies to job applicants and employees with visual disabilities
A Message from EEOC Chair Charlotte A. Burrows on the 60th Anniversary of the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom
The EEOC’s updated resource document describes two workplace protections that federal law provides to workers with hearing disabilities.
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) partners with Tribal Employment Rights Offices (TEROs) to protect the employment rights of Native Americans and Alaska Natives.
The 2022 EEO-1 Component 1 data collection will open on Tuesday, October 31, 2023. All updates, including the 2022 Instruction Booklet, will be posted to www.eeocdata.org/eeo1 as they become available.
Jump To: Source CreditMiscellaneousReferences In TextAmendmentsEffective DateShort TitleRegulationsExecutive Documents
No person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance, except that:
in regard to admissions to educational institutions, this section shall apply only to institutions of vocational education, professional education, and graduate higher education, and to public institutions of undergraduate higher education;
in regard to admissions to educational institutions, this section shall not apply (A) for one year from June 23, 1972, nor for six years after June 23, 1972, in the case of an educational institution which has begun the process of changing from being an institution which admits only students of one sex to being an institution which admits students of both sexes, but only if it is carrying out a plan for such a change which is approved by the Secretary of Education or (B) for seven years from the date an educational institution begins the process of changing from being an institution which admits only students of only one sex to being an institution which admits students of both sexes, but only if it is carrying out a plan for such a change which is approved by the Secretary of Education, whichever is the later;
this section shall not apply to an educational institution which is controlled by a religious organization if the application of this subsection would not be consistent with the religious tenets of such organization;
this section shall not apply to an educational institution whose primary purpose is the training of individuals for the military services of the United States, or the merchant marine;
in regard to admissions this section shall not apply to any public institution of undergraduate higher education which is an institution that traditionally and continually from its establishment has had a policy of admitting only students of one sex;
(A) of a social fraternity or social sorority which is exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of title 26, the active membership of which consists primarily of students in attendance at an institution of higher education, or
(B) of the Young Men's Christian Association, Young Women's Christian Association, Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts, Camp Fire Girls, and voluntary youth service organizations which are so exempt, the membership of which has traditionally been limited to persons of one sex and principally to persons of less than nineteen years of age;
(A) any program or activity of the American Legion undertaken in connection with the organization or operation of any Boys State conference, Boys Nation conference, Girls State conference, or Girls Nation conference; or
(i) the promotion of any Boys State conference, Boys Nation conference, Girls State conference, or Girls Nation conference; or
this section shall not preclude father-son or mother-daughter activities at an educational institution, but if such activities are provided for students of one sex, opportunities for reasonably comparable activities shall be provided for students of the other sex; and
this section shall not apply with respect to any scholarship or other financial assistance awarded by an institution of higher education to any individual because such individual has received such award in any pageant in which the attainment of such award is based upon a combination of factors related to the personal appearance, poise, and talent of such individual and in which participation is limited to individuals of one sex only, so long as such pageant is in compliance with other nondiscrimination provisions of Federal law.
(b) Preferential or disparate treatment because of imbalance in participation or receipt of Federal benefits; statistical evidence of imbalance
Nothing contained in subsection (a) of this section shall be interpreted to require any educational institution to grant preferential or disparate treatment to the members of one sex on account of an imbalance which may exist with respect to the total number or percentage of persons of that sex participating in or receiving the benefits of any federally supported program or activity, in comparison with the total number or percentage of persons of that sex in any community, State, section, or other area: Provided, That this subsection shall not be construed to prevent the consideration in any hearing or proceeding under this chapter of statistical evidence tending to show that such an imbalance exists with respect to the participation in, or receipt of the benefits of, any such program or activity by the members of one sex.
For purposes of this chapter an educational institution means any public or private preschool, elementary, or secondary school, or any institution of vocational, professional, or higher education, except that in the case of an educational institution composed of more than one school, college, or department which are administratively separate units, such term means each such school, college, or department.
This chapter, referred to in subsecs. (b) and (c), was in the original "this title", meaning title IX of Pub. L. 92–318 which enacted this chapter and amended sections 203 and 213 of Title 29, Labor, and sections 2000c, 2000c–6, 2000c–9, and 2000h–2 of Title 42, The Public Health and Welfare. For complete classification of title IX to the Code, see Short Title note below and Tables.
1986-Subsec. (a)(6)(A). Pub. L. 99–514 substituted "Internal Revenue Code of 1986" for "Internal Revenue Code of 1954", which for purposes of codification was translated as "title 26" thus requiring no change in text.
1976-Subsec. (a)(6) to (9). Pub. L. 94–482 substituted "this" for "This" in par. (6) and added pars. (7) to (9).
, provided that: "The amendment made by subsection (a) [amending this section] shall take effect upon the date of enactment of this Act [Oct. 12, 1976]."
, provided that: "The provisions of the amendment made by subsection (a) [amending this section] shall be effective on, and retroactive to, July 1, 1972."
, provided that: "This Act [enacting sections 1687 and 1688 of this title and section 2000d–4a of Title 42, The Public Health and Welfare, amending sections 706 and 794 of Title 29, Labor, and section 6107 of Title 42, and enacting provisions set out as notes under sections 1687 and 1688 of this title] may be cited as the 'Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987'."
, provided "That title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (20 U.S.C. 1681 et seq.; Public Law 92–318) [title IX of Pub. L. 92–318, enacting this chapter and amending sections 203 and 213 of Title 29, Labor, and sections 2000c, 2000c–6, 2000c–9, and 2000h–2 of Title 42, The Public Health and Welfare] may be cited as the 'Patsy Takemoto Mink Equal Opportunity in Education Act'."
"Secretary" substituted for "Commissioner" in subsec. (a)(2) pursuant to sections 301(a)(1) and 507 of Pub. L. 96–88, which are classified to sections 3441(a)(1) and 3507 of this title and which transferred functions of Commissioner of Education to Secretary of Education.
, directed Secretary to prepare and publish, not more than 30 days after Aug. 21, 1974, proposed regulations implementing the provisions of this chapter regarding prohibition of sex discrimination in federally assisted programs, including reasonable regulations for intercollegiate athletic activities considering the nature of the particular sports.
For provisions relating to the coordination of implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter by the Attorney General, see section 1–201(b) of Ex. Ord. No. 12250, Nov. 2, 1980, 45 F.R. 72995, set out under section 2000d–1 of Title 42, The Public Health and Welfare.
Ex. Ord. No. 14021. Guaranteeing an Educational Environment Free From Discrimination on the Basis of Sex, Including Sexual Orientation or Gender Identity
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Policy. It is the policy of my Administration that all students should be guaranteed an educational environment free from discrimination on the basis of sex, including discrimination in the form of sexual harassment, which encompasses sexual violence, and including discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity. For students attending schools and other educational institutions that receive Federal financial assistance, this guarantee is codified, in part, in Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, 20 U.S.C. 1681 et seq., which prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex in education programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance.
Sec. 2. Review of Agency Actions. (a) Within 100 days of the date of this order [Mar. 8, 2021], the Secretary of Education, in consultation with the Attorney General, shall review all existing regulations, orders, guidance documents, policies, and any other similar agency actions (collectively, agency actions) that are or may be inconsistent with the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, and provide the findings of this review to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
(i) As part of the review required under subsection (a) of this section, the Secretary of Education shall review the rule entitled "Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Sex in Education Programs or Activities Receiving Federal Financial Assistance," 85 FR 30026 (May 19, 2020), and any other agency actions taken pursuant to that rule, for consistency with governing law, including Title IX, and with the policy set forth in section 1 of this order.
(ii) As soon as practicable, and as appropriate and consistent with applicable law, the Secretary of Education shall review existing guidance and issue new guidance as needed on the implementation of the rule described in subsection (a)(i) of this section, for consistency with governing law, including Title IX, and with the policy set forth in section 1 of this order.
(iii) The Secretary of Education shall consider suspending, revising, or rescinding-or publishing for notice and comment proposed rules suspending, revising, or rescinding-those agency actions that are inconsistent with the policy set forth in section 1 of this order as soon as practicable and as appropriate and consistent with applicable law, and may issue such requests for information as would facilitate doing so.
(b) The Secretary of Education shall consider taking additional enforcement actions, as appropriate and consistent with applicable law, to enforce the policy set forth in section 1 of this order as well as legal prohibitions on sex discrimination in the form of sexual harassment, which encompasses sexual violence, to the fullest extent permissible under law; to account for intersecting forms of prohibited discrimination that can affect the availability of resources and support for students who have experienced sex discrimination, including discrimination on the basis of race, disability, and national origin; to account for the significant rates at which students who identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ+) are subject to sexual harassment, which encompasses sexual violence; to ensure that educational institutions are providing appropriate support for students who have experienced sex discrimination; and to ensure that their school procedures are fair and equitable for all.
(ii) the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budgetary, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b) This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(c) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
Due to aggressive automated scraping of FederalRegister.gov and eCFR.gov, programmatic access to these sites is limited to access to our extensive developer APIs.
If you are human user receiving this message, we can add your IP address to a set of IPs that can access FederalRegister.gov & eCFR.gov; complete the CAPTCHA (bot test) below and click "Request Access". This process will be necessary for each IP address you wish to access the site from, requests are valid for approximately one quarter (three months) after which the process may need to be repeated.
If you want to request a wider IP range, first request access for your current IP, and then use the "Site Feedback" button found in the lower left-hand side to make the request.
The purpose of this part is to effectuate title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, as amended by Pub. L. 93–568, 88 Stat. 1855 (except sections 904 and 906 of those Amendments) which is designed to eliminate (with certain exceptions) discrimination on the basis of sex in any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance, whether or not such program or activity is offered or sponsored by an educational institution as defined in this part. This part is also intended to effectuate section 844 of the Education Amendments of 1974, Pub. L. 93–380, 88 Stat. 484. The effective date of this part shall be July 21, 1975.
(Authority: Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682, as amended by Pub. L. 93–568, 88 Stat. 1855, and sec. 844, Education Amendments of 1974, 88 Stat. 484, Pub. L. 93–380)
(a) Title IX means title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, Pub. L. 92–318, as amended by section 3 of Pub. L. 93–568, 88 Stat. 1855, except sections 904 and 906 thereof; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682, 1683, 1685, 1686.
(e) Reviewing Authority means that component of the Department delegated authority by the Secretary to appoint, and to review the decisions of, administrative law judges in cases arising under this part.
(f) Administrative law judge means a person appointed by the reviewing authority to preside over a hearing held under this part.
(g) Federal financial assistance means any of the following, when authorized or extended under a law administered by the Department:
(i) The acquisition, construction, renovation, restoration, or repair of a building or facility or any portion thereof; and
(ii) Scholarships, loans, grants, wages or other funds extended to any entity for payment to or on behalf of students admitted to that entity, or extended directly to such students for payment to that entity.
(2) A grant of Federal real or personal property or any interest therein, including surplus property, and the proceeds of the sale or transfer of such property, if the Federal share of the fair market value of the property is not, upon such sale or transfer, properly accounted for to the Federal Government.
(4) Sale or lease of Federal property or any interest therein at nominal consideration, or at consideration reduced for the purpose of assisting the recipient or in recognition of public interest to be served thereby, or permission to use Federal property or any interest therein without consideration.
(5) Any other contract, agreement, or arrangement which has as one of its purposes the provision of assistance to any education program or activity, except a contract of insurance or guaranty.
(1)(i) A department, agency, special purpose district, or other instrumentality of a State or local government; or
(ii) The entity of a State or local government that distributes such assistance and each such department or agency (and each other State or local government entity) to which the assistance is extended, in the case of assistance to a State or local government;
(ii) A local educational agency (as defined in 20 U.S.C. 8801), system of vocational education, or other school system;
(A) If assistance is extended to such corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship as a whole; or
(B) Which is principally engaged in the business of providing education, health care, housing, social services, or parks and recreation; or
(ii) The entire plant or other comparable, geographically separate facility to which Federal financial assistance is extended, in the case of any other corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship; or
(4) Any other entity that is established by two or more of the entities described in paragraph (h)(1), (2), or (3) of this section; any part of which is extended Federal financial assistance.
(i) Recipient means any State or political subdivision thereof, or any instrumentality of a State or political subdivision thereof, any public or private agency, institution, or organization, or other entity, or any person, to whom Federal financial assistance is extended directly or through another recipient and which operates an education program or activity which receives such assistance, including any subunit, successor, assignee, or transferee thereof.
(j) Applicant means one who submits an application, request, or plan required to be approved by a Department official, or by a recipient, as a condition to becoming a recipient.
(k) Educational institution means a local educational agency (LEA) as defined by section 1001(f) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 3381), a preschool, a private elementary or secondary school, or an applicant or recipient of the type defined by paragraph (l), (m), (n), or (o) of this section.
(1) Offers academic study beyond the bachelor of arts or bachelor of science degree, whether or not leading to a certificate of any higher degree in the liberal arts and sciences; or
(2) Awards any degree in a professional field beyond the first professional degree (regardless of whether the first professional degree in such field is awarded by an institution of undergraduate higher education or professional education); or
(3) Awards no degree and offers no further academic study, but operates ordinarily for the purpose of facilitating research by persons who have received the highest graduate degree in any field of study.
(1) An institution offering at least two but less than four years of college level study beyond the high school level, leading to a diploma or an associate degree, or wholly or principally creditable toward a baccalaureate degree; or
(3) An agency or body which certifies credentials or offers degrees, but which may or may not offer academic study.
(n) Institution of professional education means an institution (except any institution of undergraduate higher education) which offers a program of academic study that leads to a first professional degree in a field for which there is a national specialized accrediting agency recognized by the Secretary.
(o) Institution of vocational education means a school or institution (except an institution of professional or graduate or undergraduate higher education) which has as its primary purpose preparation of students to pursue a technical, skilled, or semiskilled occupation or trade, or to pursue study in a technical field, whether or not the school or institution offers certificates, diplomas, or degrees and whether or not it offers fulltime study.
(p) Administratively separate unit means a school, department or college of an educational institution (other than a local educational agency) admission to which is independent of admission to any other component of such institution.
(q) Admission means selection for part-time, full-time, special, associate, transfer, exchange, or any other enrollment, membership, or matriculation in or at an education program or activity operated by a recipient.
(s) Transition plan means a plan subject to the approval of the Secretary pursuant to section 901(a)(2) of the Education Amendments of 1972, under which an educational institution operates in making the transition from being an educational institution which admits only students of one sex to being one which admits students of both sexes without discrimination.
(a) Remedial action. If the Assistant Secretary finds that a recipient has discriminated against persons on the basis of sex in an education program or activity, such recipient shall take such remedial action as the Assistant Secretary deems necessary to overcome the effects of such discrimination.
(b) Affirmative action. In the absence of a finding of discrimination on the basis of sex in an education program or activity, a recipient may take affirmative action to overcome the effects of conditions which resulted in limited participation therein by persons of a particular sex. Nothing herein shall be interpreted to alter any affirmative action obligations which a recipient may have under Executive Order 11246.
(c) Self-evaluation. Each recipient education institution shall, within one year of the effective date of this part:
(1) Evaluate, in terms of the requirements of this part, its current policies and practices and the effects thereof concerning admission of students, treatment of students, and employment of both academic and non-academic personnel working in connection with the recipient's education program or activity;
(3) Take appropriate remedial steps to eliminate the effects of any discrimination which resulted or may have resulted from adherence to these policies and practices.
(d) Availability of self-evaluation and related materials. Recipients shall maintain on file for at least three years following completion of the evaluation required under paragraph (c) of this section, and shall provide to the Assistant Secretary upon request, a description of any modifications made pursuant to paragraph (c)(ii) of this section and of any remedial steps taken pursuant to paragraph (c)(iii) of this section.
(a) General. Every application for Federal financial assistance shall as condition of its approval contain or be accompanied by an assurance from the applicant or recipient, satisfactory to the Assistant Secretary, that the education program or activity operated by the applicant or recipient and to which this part applies will be operated in compliance with this part. An assurance of compliance with this part shall not be satisfactory to the Assistant Secretary if the applicant or recipient to whom such assurance applies fails to commit itself to take whatever remedial action is necessary in accordance with §106.3(a) to eliminate existing discrimination on the basis of sex or to eliminate the effects of past discrimination whether occurring prior or subsequent to the submission to the Assistant Secretary of such assurance.
(b) Duration of obligation. (1) In the case of Federal financial assistance extended to provide real property or structures thereon, such assurance shall obligate the recipient or, in the case of a subsequent transfer, the transferee, for the period during which the real property or structures are used to provide an education program or activity.
(2) In the case of Federal financial assistance extended to provide personal property, such assurance shall obligate the recipient for the period during which it retains ownership or possession of the property.
(3) In all other cases such assurance shall obligate the recipient for the period during which Federal financial assistance is extended.
(c) Form. The Director will specify the form of the assurances required by paragraph (a) of this section and the extent to which such assurances will be required of the applicant's or recipient's subgrantees, contractors, subcontractors, transferees, or successors in interest.
If a recipient sells or otherwise transfers property financed in whole or in part with Federal financial assistance to a transferee which operates any education program or activity, and the Federal share of the fair market value of the property is not upon such sale or transfer properly accounted for to the Federal Government both the transferor and the transferee shall be deemed to be recipients, subject to the provisions of subpart B of this part.
(a) Effect of other Federal provisions. The obligations imposed by this part are independent of, and do not alter, obligations not to discriminate on the basis of sex imposed by Executive Order 11246, as amended; sections 704 and 855 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 292d and 298b–2); Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.); the Equal Pay Act (29 U.S.C. 206 and 206(d)); and any other Act of Congress or Federal regulation.
(Authority: Secs. 901, 902, 905, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374, 375; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682, 1685)
(b) Effect of State or local law or other requirements. The obligation to comply with this part is not obviated or alleviated by any State or local law or other requirement which would render any applicant or student ineligible, or limit the eligibility of any applicant or student, on the basis of sex, to practice any occupation or profession.
(c) Effect of rules or regulations of private organizations. The obligation to comply with this part is not obviated or alleviated by any rule or regulation of any organization, club, athletic or other league, or association which would render any applicant or student ineligible to participate or limit the eligibility or participation of any applicant or student, on the basis of sex, in any education program or activity operated by a recipient and which receives Federal financial assistance.
The obligation to comply with this part is not obviated or alleviated because employment opportunities in any occupation or profession are or may be more limited for members of one sex than for members of the other sex.
(a) Designation of responsible employee. Each recipient shall designate at least one employee to coordinate its efforts to comply with and carry out its responsibilities under this part, including any investigation of any complaint communicated to such recipient alleging its noncompliance with this part or alleging any actions which would be prohibited by this part. The recipient shall notify all its students and employees of the name, office address and telephone number of the employee or employees appointed pursuant to this paragraph.
(b) Complaint procedure of recipient. A recipient shall adopt and publish grievance procedures providing for prompt and equitable resolution of student and employee complaints alleging any action which would be prohibited by this part.
(a) Notification of policy. (1) Each recipient shall implement specific and continuing steps to notify applicants for admission and employment, students and parents of elementary and secondary school students, employees, sources of referral of applicants for admission and employment, and all unions or professional organizations holding collective bargaining or professional agreements with the recipient, that it does not discriminate on the basis of sex in the educational program or activity which it operates, and that it is required by title IX and this part not to discriminate in such a manner. Such notification shall contain such information, and be made in such manner, as the Assistant Secretary finds necessary to apprise such persons of the protections against discrimination assured them by title IX and this part, but shall state at least that the requirement not to discriminate in the education program or activity extends to employment therein, and to admission thereto unless Subpart C does not apply to the recipient, and that inquiries concerning the application of title IX and this part to such recipient may be referred to the employee designated pursuant to §106.8, or to the Assistant Secretary.
(2) Each recipient shall make the initial notification required by paragraph (a)(1) of this section within 90 days of the effective date of this part or of the date this part first applies to such recipient, whichever comes later, which notification shall include publication in:
(ii) Newspapers and magazines operated by such recipient or by student, alumnae, or alumni groups for or in connection with such recipient; and
(b) Publications. (1) Each recipient shall prominently include a statement of the policy described in paragraph (a) of this section in each announcement, bulletin, catalog, or application form which it makes available to any person of a type, described in paragraph (a) of this section, or which is otherwise used in connection with the recruitment of students or employees.
(2) A recipient shall not use or distribute a publication of the type described in this paragraph which suggests, by text or illustration, that such recipient treats applicants, students, or employees differently on the basis of sex except as such treatment is permitted by this part.
(c) Distribution. Each recipient shall distribute without discrimination on the basis of sex each publication described in paragraph (b) of this section, and shall apprise each of its admission and employment recruitment representatives of the policy of nondiscrimination described in paragraph (a) of this section, and require such representatives to adhere to such policy.
Except as provided in this subpart, this part 106 applies to every recipient and to the education program or activity operated by such recipient which receives Federal financial assistance.
(a) Application. This part does not apply to an educational institution which is controlled by a religious organization to the extent application of this part would not be consistent with the religious tenets of such organization.
(b) Exemption. An educational institution which wishes to claim the exemption set forth in paragraph (a) of this section, shall do so by submitting in writing to the Assistant Secretary a statement by the highest ranking official of the institution, identifying the provisions of this part which conflict with a specific tenet of the religious organization.
This part does not apply to an educational institution whose primary purpose is the training of individuals for a military service of the United States or for the merchant marine.
(a) Social fraternities and sororities. This part does not apply to the membership practices of social fraternities and sororities which are exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, the active membership of which consists primarily of students in attendance at institutions of higher education.
(b) YMCA, YWCA, Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts and Camp Fire Girls. This part does not apply to the membership practices of the Young Men's Christian Association, the Young Women's Christian Association, the Girl Scouts, the Boy Scouts and Camp Fire Girls.
(c) Voluntary youth service organizations. This part does not apply to the membership practices of voluntary youth service organizations which are exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 and the membership of which has been traditionally limited to members of one sex and principally to persons of less than nineteen years of age.
(Authority: Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682; sec. 3(a) of P.L. 93–568, 88 Stat. 1862 amending Sec. 901)
(b) Administratively separate units. For the purposes only of this section, §§106.16 and 106.17, and subpart C, each administratively separate unit shall be deemed to be an educational institution.
(c) Application of subpart C. Except as provided in paragraphs (d) and (e) of this section, subpart C applies to each recipient. A recipient to which subpart C applies shall not discriminate on the basis of sex in admission or recruitment in violation of that subpart.
(d) Educational institutions. Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section as to recipients which are educational institutions, subpart C applies only to institutions of vocational education, professional education, graduate higher education, and public institutions of undergraduate higher education.
(e) Public institutions of undergraduate higher education. Subpart C does not apply to any public institution of undergraduate higher education which traditionally and continually from its establishment has had a policy of admitting only students of one sex.
(2) Admitted only students of one sex as regular students as of June 23, 1965, but thereafter admitted as regular students, students of the sex not admitted prior to June 23, 1965.
(b) Provision for transition plans. An educational institution to which this section applies shall not discriminate on the basis of sex in admission or recruitment in violation of subpart C unless it is carrying out a transition plan approved by the Secretary as described in §106.17, which plan provides for the elimination of such discrimination by the earliest practicable date but in no event later than June 23, 1979.
(a) Submission of plans. An institution to which §106.16 applies and which is composed of more than one administratively separate unit may submit either a single transition plan applicable to all such units, or a separate transition plan applicable to each such unit.
(1) State the name, address, and Federal Interagency Committee on Education (FICE) Code of the educational institution submitting such plan, the administratively separate units to which the plan is applicable, and the name, address, and telephone number of the person to whom questions concerning the plan may be addressed. The person who submits the plan shall be the chief administrator or president of the institution, or another individual legally authorized to bind the institution to all actions set forth in the plan.
(2) State whether the educational institution or administratively separate unit admits students of both sexes, as regular students and, if so, when it began to do so.
(3) Identify and describe with respect to the educational institution or administratively separate unit any obstacles to admitting students without discrimination on the basis of sex.
(4) Describe in detail the steps necessary to eliminate as soon as practicable each obstacle so identified and indicate the schedule for taking these steps and the individual directly responsible for their implementation.
(5) Include estimates of the number of students, by sex, expected to apply for, be admitted to, and enter each class during the period covered by the plan.
(c) Nondiscrimination. No policy or practice of a recipient to which §106.16 applies shall result in treatment of applicants to or students of such recipient in violation of subpart C unless such treatment is necessitated by an obstacle identified in paragraph (b) (3) of this section and a schedule for eliminating that obstacle has been provided as required by paragraph (b) (4) of this section.
(d) Effects of past exclusion. To overcome the effects of past exclusion of students on the basis of sex, each educational institution to which §106.16 applies shall include in its transition plan, and shall implement, specific steps designed to encourage individuals of the previously excluded sex to apply for admission to such institution. Such steps shall include instituting recruitment which emphasizes the institution's commitment to enrolling students of the sex previously excluded.
(a) General. No person shall, on the basis of sex, be denied admission, or be subjected to discrimination in admission, by any recipient to which this subpart applies, except as provided in §§106.16 and 106.17.
(b) Specific prohibitions. (1) In determining whether a person satisfies any policy or criterion for admission, or in making any offer of admission, a recipient to which this subpart applies shall not:
(i) Give preference to one person over another on the basis of sex, by ranking applicants separately on such basis, or otherwise;
(ii) Apply numerical limitations upon the number or proportion of persons of either sex who may be admitted; or
(2) A recipient shall not administer or operate any test or other criterion for admission which has a disproportionately adverse effect on persons on the basis of sex unless the use of such test or criterion is shown to predict validly success in the education program or activity in question and alternative tests or criteria which do not have such a disproportionately adverse effect are shown to be unavailable.
(c) Prohibitions relating to marital or parental status. In determining whether a person satisfies any policy or criterion for admission, or in making any offer of admission, a recipient to which this subpart applies:
(1) Shall not apply any rule concerning the actual or potential parental, family, or marital status of a student or applicant which treats persons differently on the basis of sex;
(2) Shall not discriminate against or exclude any person on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth, termination of pregnancy, or recovery therefrom, or establish or follow any rule or practice which so discriminates or excludes;
(3) Shall treat disabilities related to pregnancy, childbirth, termination of pregnancy, or recovery therefrom in the same manner and under the same policies as any other temporary disability or physical condition; and
(4) Shall not make pre-admission inquiry as to the marital status of an applicant for admission, including whether such applicant is “Miss” or “Mrs.” A recipient may make pre-admission inquiry as to the sex of an applicant for admision, but only if such inquiry is made equally of such applicants of both sexes and if the results of such inquiry are not used in connection with discrimination prohibited by this part.
A recipient to which this subpart applies shall not give preference to applicants for admission, on the basis of attendance at any educational institution or other school or entity which admits as students only or predominantly members of one sex, if the giving of such preference has the effect of discriminating on the basis of sex in violation of this subpart.
(a) Nondiscriminatory recruitment. A recipient to which this subpart applies shall not discriminate on the basis of sex in the recruitment and admission of students. A recipient may be required to undertake additional recruitment efforts for one sex as remedial action pursuant to §106.3(a), and may choose to undertake such efforts as affirmative action pursuant to §106.3(b).
(b) Recruitment at certain institutions. A recipient to which this subpart applies shall not recruit primarily or exclusively at educational institutions, schools or entities which admit as students only or predominantly members of one sex, if such actions have the effect of discriminating on the basis of sex in violation of this subpart.
(a) General. Except as provided elsewhere in this part, no person shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any academic, extracurricular, research, occupational training, or other education program or activity operated by a recipient which receives Federal financial assistance. This subpart does not apply to actions of a recipient in connection with admission of its students to an education program or activity of (1) a recipient to which subpart C does not apply, or (2) an entity, not a recipient, to which subpart C would not apply if the entity were a recipient.
(b) Specific prohibitions. Except as provided in this subpart, in providing any aid, benefit, or service to a student, a recipient shall not, on the basis of sex:
(1) Treat one person differently from another in determining whether such person satisfies any requirement or condition for the provision of such aid, benefit, or service;
(5) Apply any rule concerning the domicile or residence of a student or applicant, including eligibility for in-state fees and tuition;
(6) Aid or perpetuate discrimination against any person by providing significant assistance to any agency, organization, or person which discriminates on the basis of sex in providing any aid, benefit or service to students or employees;
(c) Assistance administered by a recipient educational institution to study at a foreign institution. A recipient educational institution may administer or assist in the administration of scholarships, fellowships, or other awards established by foreign or domestic wills, trusts, or similar legal instruments, or by acts of foreign governments and restricted to members of one sex, which are designed to provide opportunities to study abroad, and which are awarded to students who are already matriculating at or who are graduates of the recipient institution; Provided, a recipient educational institution which administers or assists in the administration of such scholarships, fellowships, or other awards which are restricted to members of one sex provides, or otherwise makes available reasonable opportunities for similar studies for members of the other sex. Such opportunities may be derived from either domestic or foreign sources.
(d) Aid, benefits or services not provided by recipient. (1) This paragraph applies to any recipient which requires participation by any applicant, student, or employee in any education program or activity not operated wholly by such recipient, or which facilitates, permits, or considers such participation as part of or equivalent to an education program or activity operated by such recipient, including participation in educational consortia and cooperative employment and student-teaching assignments.
(i) Shall develop and implement a procedure designed to assure itself that the operator or sponsor of such other education program or activity takes no action affecting any applicant, student, or employee of such recipient which this part would prohibit such recipient from taking; and
(a) Generally. A recipient shall not, on the basis of sex, apply different rules or regulations, impose different fees or requirements, or offer different services or benefits related to housing, except as provided in this section (including housing provided only to married students).
(2) Housing provided by a recipient to students of one sex, when compared to that provided to students of the other sex, shall be as a whole:
(c) Other housing. (1) A recipient shall not, on the basis of sex, administer different policies or practices concerning occupancy by its students of housing other than provided by such recipient.
(2) A recipient which, through solicitation, listing, approval of housing, or otherwise, assists any agency, organization, or person in making housing available to any of its students, shall take such reasonable action as may be necessary to assure itself that such housing as is provided to students of one sex, when compared to that provided to students of the other sex, is as a whole:
A recipient may render such assistance to any agency, organization, or person which provides all or part of such housing to students only of one sex.
(Authority: Secs. 901, 902, 907, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374, 375; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682, 1686)
A recipient may provide separate toilet, locker room, and shower facilities on the basis of sex, but such facilities provided for students of one sex shall be comparable to such facilities provided for students of the other sex.
(a) General standard. Except as provided for in this section or otherwise in this part, a recipient shall not provide or otherwise carry out any of its education programs or activities separately on the basis of sex, or require or refuse participation therein by any of its students on the basis of sex.
(1) Contact sports in physical education classes. This section does not prohibit separation of students by sex within physical education classes or activities during participation in wrestling, boxing, rugby, ice hockey, football, basketball, and other sports the purpose or major activity of which involves bodily contact.
(2) Ability grouping in physical education classes. This section does not prohibit grouping of students in physical education classes and activities by ability as assessed by objective standards of individual performance developed and applied without regard to sex.
(3) Human sexuality classes. Classes or portions of classes in elementary and secondary schools that deal primarily with human sexuality may be conducted in separate sessions for boys and girls.
(4) Choruses. Recipients may make requirements based on vocal range or quality that may result in a chorus or choruses of one or predominantly one sex.
(b) Classes and extracurricular activities. (1) General standard. Subject to the requirements in this paragraph, a recipient that operates a nonvocational coeducational elementary or secondary school may provide nonvocational single-sex classes or extracurricular activities, if—
(A) To improve educational achievement of its students, through a recipient's overall established policy to provide diverse educational opportunities, provided that the single-sex nature of the class or extracurricular activity is substantially related to achieving that objective; or
(B) To meet the particular, identified educational needs of its students, provided that the single-sex nature of the class or extracurricular activity is substantially related to achieving that objective;
(iv) The recipient provides to all other students, including students of the excluded sex, a substantially equal coeducational class or extracurricular activity in the same subject or activity.
(2) Single-sex class or extracurricular activity for the excluded sex. A recipient that provides a single-sex class or extracurricular activity, in order to comply with paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this section, may be required to provide a substantially equal single-sex class or extracurricular activity for students of the excluded sex.
(3) Substantially equal factors. Factors the Department will consider, either individually or in the aggregate as appropriate, in determining whether classes or extracurricular activities are substantially equal include, but are not limited to, the following: the policies and criteria of admission, the educational benefits provided, including the quality, range, and content of curriculum and other services and the quality and availability of books, instructional materials, and technology, the qualifications of faculty and staff, geographic accessibility, the quality, accessibility, and availability of facilities and resources provided to the class, and intangible features, such as reputation of faculty.
(4) Periodic evaluations. (i) The recipient must conduct periodic evaluations to ensure that single-sex classes or extracurricular activities are based upon genuine justifications and do not rely on overly broad generalizations about the different talents, capacities, or preferences of either sex and that any single-sex classes or extracurricular activities are substantially related to the achievement of the important objective for the classes or extracurricular activities.
(ii) Evaluations for the purposes of paragraph (b)(4)(i) of this section must be conducted at least every two years.
(5) Scope of coverage. The provisions of paragraph (b)(1) through (4) of this section apply to classes and extracurricular activities provided by a recipient directly or through another entity, but the provisions of paragraph (b)(1) through (4) of this section do not apply to interscholastic, club, or intramural athletics, which are subject to the provisions of §§106.41 and 106.37(c) of this part.
(c) Schools. (1) General Standard. Except as provided in paragraph (c)(2) of this section, a recipient that operates a public nonvocational elementary or secondary school that excludes from admission any students, on the basis of sex, must provide students of the excluded sex a substantially equal single-sex school or coeducational school.
(2) Exception. A nonvocational public charter school that is a single-school local educational agency under State law may be operated as a single-sex charter school without regard to the requirements in paragraph (c)(1) of this section.
(3) Substantially equal factors. Factors the Department will consider, either individually or in the aggregate as appropriate, in determining whether schools are substantially equal include, but are not limited to, the following: The policies and criteria of admission, the educational benefits provided, including the quality, range, and content of curriculum and other services and the quality and availability of books, instructional materials, and technology, the quality and range of extracurricular offerings, the qualifications of faculty and staff, geographic accessibility, the quality, accessibility, and availability of facilities and resources, and intangible features, such as reputation of faculty.
(4) Definition. For the purposes of paragraph (c)(1) through (3) of this section, the term “school” includes a “school within a school,” which means an administratively separate school located within another school.
A recipient shall not, on the basis of sex, exclude any person from admission to any institution of vocational education operated by that recipient.
(a) Counseling. A recipient shall not discriminate against any person on the basis of sex in the counseling or guidance of students or applicants for admission.
(b) Use of appraisal and counseling materials. A recipient which uses testing or other materials for appraising or counseling students shall not use different materials for students on the basis of their sex or use materials which permit or require different treatment of students on such basis unless such different materials cover the same occupations and interest areas and the use of such different materials is shown to be essential to eliminate sex bias. Recipients shall develop and use internal procedures for ensuring that such materials do not discriminate on the basis of sex. Where the use of a counseling test or other instrument results in a substantially disproportionate number of members of one sex in any particular course of study or classification, the recipient shall take such action as is necessary to assure itself that such disproportion is not the result of discrimination in the instrument or its application.
(c) Disproportion in classes. Where a recipient finds that a particular class contains a substantially disproportionate number of individuals of one sex, the recipient shall take such action as is necessary to assure itself that such disproportion is not the result of discrimination on the basis of sex in counseling or appraisal materials or by counselors.
(a) General. Except as provided in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, in providing financial assistance to any of its students, a recipient shall not:
(1) On the basis of sex, provide different amount or types of such assistance, limit eligibility for such assistance which is of any particular type or source, apply different criteria, or otherwise discriminate;
(2) Through solicitation, listing, approval, provision of facilities or other services, assist any foundation, trust, agency, organization, or person which provides assistance to any of such recipient's students in a manner which discriminates on the basis of sex; or
(3) Apply any rule or assist in application of any rule concerning eligibility for such assistance which treats persons of one sex differently from persons of the other sex with regard to marital or parental status.
(b) Financial aid established by certain legal instruments. (1) A recipient may administer or assist in the administration of scholarships, fellowships, or other forms of financial assistance established pursuant to domestic or foreign wills, trusts, bequests, or similar legal instruments or by acts of a foreign government which requires that awards be made to members of a particular sex specified therein; Provided, That the overall effect of the award of such sex-restricted scholarships, fellowships, and other forms of financial assistance does not discriminate on the basis of sex.
(2) To ensure nondiscriminatory awards of assistance as required in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, recipients shall develop and use procedures under which:
(i) Students are selected for award of financial assistance on the basis of nondiscriminatory criteria and not on the basis of availability of funds restricted to members of a particular sex;
(ii) An appropriate sex-restricted scholarship, fellowship, or other form of financial assistance is allocated to each student selected under paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section; and
(iii) No student is denied the award for which he or she was selected under paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section because of the absence of a scholarship, fellowship, or other form of financial assistance designated for a member of that student's sex.
(c) Athletic scholarships. (1) To the extent that a recipient awards athletic scholarships or grants-in-aid, it must provide reasonable opportunities for such awards for members of each sex in proportion to the number of students of each sex participating in interscholastic or intercollegiate athletics.
(2) Separate athletic scholarships or grants-in-aid for members of each sex may be provided as part of separate athletic teams for members of each sex to the extent consistent with this paragraph and §106.41.
(Authority: Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682; and Sec. 844, Education Amendments of 1974, Pub. L. 93–380, 88 Stat. 484)
(a) Assistance by recipient in making available outside employment. A recipient which assists any agency, organization or person in making employment available to any of its students:
(2) Shall not render such services to any agency, organization, or person which discriminates on the basis of sex in its employment practices.
(b) Employment of students by recipients. A recipient which employs any of its students shall not do so in a manner which violates subpart E of this part.
In providing a medical, hospital, accident, or life insurance benefit, service, policy, or plan to any of its students, a recipient shall not discriminate on the basis of sex, or provide such benefit, service, policy, or plan in a manner which would violate Subpart E of this part if it were provided to employees of the recipient. This section shall not prohibit a recipient from providing any benefit or service which may be used by a different proportion of students of one sex than of the other, including family planning services. However, any recipient which provides full coverage health service shall provide gynecological care.
(a) Status generally. A recipient shall not apply any rule concerning a student's actual or potential parental, family, or marital status which treats students differently on the basis of sex.
(b) Pregnancy and related conditions. (1) A recipient shall not discriminate against any student, or exclude any student from its education program or activity, including any class or extracurricular activity, on the basis of such student's pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy or recovery therefrom, unless the student requests voluntarily to participate in a separate portion of the program or activity of the recipient.
(2) A recipient may require such a student to obtain the certification of a physician that the student is physically and emotionally able to continue participation so long as such a certification is required of all students for other physical or emotional conditions requiring the attention of a physician.
(3) A recipient which operates a portion of its education program or activity separately for pregnant students, admittance to which is completely voluntary on the part of the student as provided in paragraph (b)(1) of this section shall ensure that the separate portion is comparable to that offered to non-pregnant students.
(4) A recipient shall treat pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy and recovery therefrom in the same manner and under the same policies as any other temporary disability with respect to any medical or hospital benefit, service, plan or policy which such recipient administers, operates, offers, or participates in with respect to students admitted to the recipient's educational program or activity.
(5) In the case of a recipient which does not maintain a leave policy for its students, or in the case of a student who does not otherwise qualify for leave under such a policy, a recipient shall treat pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy and recovery therefrom as a justification for a leave of absence for so long a period of time as is deemed medically necessary by the student's physician, at the conclusion of which the student shall be reinstated to the status which she held when the leave began.
(a) General. No person shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, be treated differently from another person or otherwise be discriminated against in any interscholastic, intercollegiate, club or intramural athletics offered by a recipient, and no recipient shall provide any such athletics separately on such basis.
(b) Separate teams. Notwithstanding the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section, a recipient may operate or sponsor separate teams for members of each sex where selection for such teams is based upon competitive skill or the activity involved is a contact sport. However, where a recipient operates or sponsors a team in a particular sport for members of one sex but operates or sponsors no such team for members of the other sex, and athletic opportunities for members of that sex have previously been limited, members of the excluded sex must be allowed to try-out for the team offered unless the sport involved is a contact sport. For the purposes of this part, contact sports include boxing, wrestling, rugby, ice hockey, football, basketball and other sports the purpose or major activity of which involves bodily contact.
(c) Equal opportunity. A recipient which operates or sponsors interscholastic, intercollegiate, club or intramural athletics shall provide equal athletic opportunity for members of both sexes. In determining whether equal opportunities are available the Director will consider, among other factors:
(1) Whether the selection of sports and levels of competition effectively accommodate the interests and abilities of members of both sexes;
Unequal aggregate expenditures for members of each sex or unequal expenditures for male and female teams if a recipient operates or sponsors separate teams will not constitute noncompliance with this section, but the Assistant Secretary may consider the failure to provide necessary funds for teams for one sex in assessing equality of opportunity for members of each sex.
(d) Adjustment period. A recipient which operates or sponsors interscholastic, intercollegiate, club or intramural athletics at the elementary school level shall comply fully with this section as expeditiously as possible but in no event later than one year from the effective date of this regulation. A recipient which operates or sponsors interscholastic, intercollegiate, club or intramural athletics at the secondary or post-secondary school level shall comply fully with this section as expeditiously as possible but in no event later than three years from the effective date of this regulation.
(Authority: Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682; and Sec. 844, Education Amendments of 1974, Pub. L. 93–380, 88 Stat. 484)
Nothing in this regulation shall be interpreted as requiring or prohibiting or abridging in any way the use of particular textbooks or curricular materials.
If use of a single standard of measuring skill or progress in physical education classes has an adverse effect on members of one sex, the recipient shall use appropriate standards that do not have that effect.
(a) General. (1) No person shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination in employment, or recruitment, consideration, or selection therefor, whether full-time or part-time, under any education program or activity operated by a recipient which receives Federal financial assistance.
(2) A recipient shall make all employment decisions in any education program or activity operated by such recipient in a nondiscriminatory manner and shall not limit, segregate, or classify applicants or employees in any way which could adversely affect any applicant's or employee's employment opportunities or status because of sex.
(3) A recipient shall not enter into any contractual or other relationship which directly or indirectly has the effect of subjecting employees or students to discrimination prohibited by this subpart, including relationships with employment and referral agencies, with labor unions, and with organizations providing or administering fringe benefits to employees of the recipient.
(4) A recipient shall not grant preferences to applicants for employment on the basis of attendance at any educational institution or entity which admits as students only or predominantly members of one sex, if the giving of such preferences has the effect of discriminating on the basis of sex in violation of this part.
(2) Hiring, upgrading, promotion, consideration for and award of tenure, demotion, transfer, layoff, termination, application of nepotism policies, right of return from layoff, and rehiring;
(4) Job assignments, classifications and structure, including position descriptions, lines of progression, and seniority lists;
(6) Granting and return from leaves of absence, leave for pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy, leave for persons of either sex to care for children or dependents, or any other leave;
(8) Selection and financial support for training, including apprenticeship, professional meetings, conferences, and other related activities, selection for tuition assistance, selection for sabbaticals and leaves of absence to pursue training;
A recipient shall not administer or operate any test or other criterion for any employment opportunity which has a disproportionately adverse effect on persons on the basis of sex unless:
(a) Use of such test or other criterion is shown to predict validly successful performance in the position in question; and
(b) Alternative tests or criteria for such purpose, which do not have such disproportionately adverse effect, are shown to be unavailable.
(a) Nondiscriminatory recruitment and hiring. A recipient shall not discriminate on the basis of sex in the recruitment and hiring of employees. Where a recipient has been found to be presently discriminating on the basis of sex in the recruitment or hiring of employees, or has been found to have in the past so discriminated, the recipient shall recruit members of the sex so discriminated against so as to overcome the effects of such past or present discrimination.
(b) Recruitment patterns. A recipient shall not recruit primarily or exclusively at entities which furnish as applicants only or predominantly members of one sex if such actions have the effect of discriminating on the basis of sex in violation of this subpart.
(b) Results in the payment of wages to employees of one sex at a rate less than that paid to employees of the opposite sex for equal work on jobs the performance of which requires equal skill, effort, and responsibility, and which are performed under similar working conditions.
(b) Maintain or establish separate lines of progression, seniority lists, career ladders, or tenure systems based on sex; or
(c) Maintain or establish separate lines of progression, seniority systems, career ladders, or tenure systems for similar jobs, position descriptions, or job requirements which classify persons on the basis of sex, unless sex is a bona-fide occupational qualification for the positions in question as set forth in §106.61.
(a) Fringe benefits defined. For purposes of this part, fringe benefits means: Any medical, hospital, accident, life insurance or retirement benefit, service, policy or plan, any profit-sharing or bonus plan, leave, and any other benefit or service of employment not subject to the provision of §106.54.
(1) Discriminate on the basis of sex with regard to making fringe benefits available to employees or make fringe benefits available to spouses, families, or dependents of employees differently upon the basis of the employee's sex;
(2) Administer, operate, offer, or participate in a fringe benefit plan which does not provide either for equal periodic benefits for members of each sex, or for equal contributions to the plan by such recipient for members of each sex; or
(3) Administer, operate, offer, or participate in a pension or retirement plan which establishes different optional or compulsory retirement ages based on sex or which otherwise discriminates in benefits on the basis of sex.
(1) Concerning the potential marital, parental, or family status of an employee or applicant for employment which treats persons differently on the basis of sex; or
(2) Which is based upon whether an employee or applicant for employment is the head of household or principal wage earner in such employee's or applicant's family unit.
(b) Pregnancy. A recipient shall not discriminate against or exclude from employment any employee or applicant for employment on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy, or recovery therefrom.
(c) Pregnancy as a temporary disability. A recipient shall treat pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy, and recovery therefrom and any temporary disability resulting therefrom as any other temporary disability for all job related purposes, including commencement, duration and extensions of leave, payment of disability income, accrual of seniority and any other benefit or service, and reinstatement, and under any fringe benefit offered to employees by virtue of employment.
(d) Pregnancy leave. In the case of a recipient which does not maintain a leave policy for its employees, or in the case of an employee with insufficient leave or accrued employment time to qualify for leave under such a policy, a recipient shall treat pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy and recovery therefrom as a justification for a leave of absence without pay for a reasonable period of time, at the conclusion of which the employee shall be reinstated to the status which she held when the leave began or to a comparable position, without decrease in rate of compensation or loss of promotional opportunities, or any other right or privilege of employment.
(a) Prohibitory requirements. The obligation to comply with this subpart is not obviated or alleviated by the existence of any State or local law or other requirement which imposes prohibitions or limits upon employment of members of one sex which are not imposed upon members of the other sex.
(b) Benefits. A recipient which provides any compensation, service, or benefit to members of one sex pursuant to a State or local law or other requirement shall provide the same compensation, service, or benefit to members of the other sex.
A recipient shall not in any advertising related to employment indicate preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination based on sex unless sex is a bona-fide occupational qualification for the particular job in question.
(a) Marital status. A recipient shall not make pre-employment inquiry as to the marital status of an applicant for employment, including whether such applicant is “Miss or Mrs.”
(b) Sex. A recipient may make pre-employment inquiry as to the sex of an applicant for employment, but only if such inquiry is made equally of such applicants of both sexes and if the results of such inquiry are not used in connection with discrimination prohibited by this part.
A recipient may take action otherwise prohibited by this subpart provided it is shown that sex is a bona-fide occupational qualification for that action, such that consideration of sex with regard to such action is essential to successful operation of the employment function concerned. A recipient shall not take action pursuant to this section which is based upon alleged comparative employment characteristics or stereotyped characterizations of one or the other sex, or upon preference based on sex of the recipient, employees, students, or other persons, but nothing contained in this section shall prevent a recipient from considering an employee's sex in relation to employment in a locker room or toilet facility used only by members of one sex.
The procedural provisions applicable to title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. These procedures may be found at 34 CFR 100.6–100.11 and 34 CFR, part 101.
Appendix A to Part 106—Guidelines for Eliminating Discrimination and Denial of Services on the Basis of Race, Color, National Origin, Sex, and Handicap in Vocational Education Programs
<>/Filter/FlateDecode/ID[<74E4DE3DF48D6749AC78BD44E2E98978>]/Index[132 106]/Info 131 0 R/Length 199/Prev 603942/Root 133 0 R/Size 238/Type/XRef/W[1 3 1]>>stream
<>/Metadata 19 0 R/Names 183 0 R/PageLayout/OneColumn/Pages 128 0 R/StructTreeRoot 33 0 R/Type/Catalog/ViewerPreferences<>>>
<</BitsPerComponent 8/ColorSpace/DeviceGray/DecodeParms<</BitsPerComponent 8/Colors 1/Columns 127>>/Filter/FlateDecode/Height 122/Length 1224/Name/X/Subtype/Image/Type/XObject/Width 127>>stream
<</BitsPerComponent 8/ColorSpace/DeviceRGB/Filter/DCTDecode/Height 122/Length 9311/Name/X/SMask 179 0 R/Subtype/Image/Type/XObject/Width 127>>stream
<</Contents 2 0 R/CropBox[0.0 0.0 612.0 792.0]/Group 236 0 R/MediaBox[0.0 0.0 612.0 792.0]/Parent 128 0 R/Resources<</ExtGState<</GS0 186 0 R>>/Font<</C2_0 26 0 R/TT0 227 0 R/TT1 27 0 R>>/ProcSet[/PDF/Text/ImageC]/XObject<</Im0 5 0 R>>>>/Rotate 0/StructParents 8/Tabs/S/Type/Page>>
<</BitsPerComponent 8/ColorSpace/DeviceGray/DecodeParms<</BitsPerComponent 8/Colors 1/Columns 127>>/Filter/FlateDecode/Height 122/Length 1224/Name/X/Subtype/Image/Type/XObject/Width 127>>stream
<</BitsPerComponent 8/ColorSpace/DeviceRGB/Filter/DCTDecode/Height 122/Length 10102/Name/X/SMask 4 0 R/Subtype/Image/Type/XObject/Width 127>>stream
<</Annots 24 0 R/Contents 8 0 R/CropBox[0.0 0.0 612.0 792.0]/Group 236 0 R/MediaBox[0.0 0.0 612.0 792.0]/Parent 128 0 R/Resources<</ExtGState<</GS0 186 0 R>>/Font<</C2_0 29 0 R/TT0 227 0 R/TT1 27 0 R>>/ProcSet[/PDF/Text/ImageC]/XObject<</Im0 11 0 R>>>>/Rotate 0/StructParents 9/Tabs/S/Type/Page>>
<</BitsPerComponent 8/ColorSpace/DeviceGray/DecodeParms<</BitsPerComponent 8/Colors 1/Columns 347>>/Filter/FlateDecode/Height 85/Length 54/Name/X/Subtype/Image/Type/XObject/Width 347>>stream
<</BitsPerComponent 8/ColorSpace/DeviceRGB/Filter/DCTDecode/Height 85/Length 6591/Name/X/SMask 10 0 R/Subtype/Image/Type/XObject/Width 347>>stream
<rdf:li xml:lang="x-default">Letter to Students, Educators, and Other Stakeholders Victims Rights Law Center et al. v. Cardona (PDF) </rdf:li>
<</DecodeParms<</Columns 5/Predictor 12>>/Filter/FlateDecode/ID[<F79E1895AAF52148BB7AB53BC10813FD><74E4DE3DF48D6749AC78BD44E2E98978>]/Info 131 0 R/Length 127/Root 133 0 R/Size 132/Type/XRef/W[1 3 1]>>stream
Legislation, regulations, guidance, and other policy documents can be found here for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), and other topics.
Please note that in the U.S., the federal role in education is limited. Because of the Tenth Amendment, most education policy is decided at the state and local levels.  So, if you have a question about a policy or issue, you may want to check with the relevant organization in your state or school district.
Text of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, as amended through 12/27/22:  PDF (1.2M) |  Text (3.3M)
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
OCR enforces several Federal civil rights laws that prohibit discrimination in programs or activities that receive Federal funds from the Department of Education. These laws prohibit discrimination on the basis of race, color, and national origin, sex, disability, and on the basis of age. These laws extend to all state education agencies, elementary and secondary school systems, colleges and universities, vocational schools, proprietary schools, state vocational rehabilitation agencies, libraries, and museums that receive U.S. Department of Education funds. OCR also has responsibilities under Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (prohibiting disability discrimination by public entities, whether or not they receive federal financial assistance). In addition, as of January 8, 2002, OCR enforces the Boy Scouts of America Equal Access Act (Section 9525 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, as amended by the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001). Under the Boy Scouts of America Equal Access Act, no public elementary or secondary school or State or local education agency that provides an opportunity for one or more outside youth or community groups to meet on school premises or in school facilities shall deny equal access or a fair opportunity to meet to, or discriminate against, any group officially affiliated with the Boy Scouts of America, or any other youth group listed in Title 36 of the United States Code as a patriotic society, that wishes to meet at the school.
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
1. Privacy Policy SummaryThank you for visiting the U.S. Department of Education (ED) website and reviewing our privacy policy.  Our policy is simple: We collect no personal information about you unless you choose to provide that information to us. We do not give, share, sell, or transfer any personal information to a third party.
Some of our web pages (such as online publication order forms, conference and training registration forms, web discussion forums) let you voluntarily submit personal information.  In those cases, we will provide a specific notice before you begin submitting any personal information, explaining how your information will be safeguarded.
If you want to know more about how we record non-personal information about your visit or how we use information that you voluntarily submit, read on. TOP
2. Non-personal Information We RecordIf you do nothing during your visit but browse through the website, read pages, or download information, our website's operating system will automatically record some general information about your visit.
The Internet domain for your Internet service, such as "xcompany.com" or "xcompany.net" if you use a private Internet access account, or "yourschool.edu" if you connect from a college or university domain.
We use this information for statistical analysis, to help us make our site more useful to visitors. This tracking system does not record information about individuals. TOP
3. CookiesThe Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Memo M-10-22:  Guidance for Online Use of Web Measurement and Customization Technologies allows Federal Agencies to use sessions and persistent cookies.”
When you visit any website, its server may generate a piece of text known as a "cookie" to place on your computer. Placing cookie text allows websites to "remember" visitors' preferences, surfing patterns and behavior while they are connected.
The cookie makes it easier for you to use the dynamic features of Web pages. Cookies from ED.gov Web pages only collect information about your browser's visit to the site; they do not collect any personal information about you.
There are two types of cookies, single session (temporary), and multi-session (persistent). Session cookies last only as long as your Web browser is open. Once you close your browser, the cookie disappears. Persistent cookies are stored on your computer for longer periods.
Session Cookies: We use session cookies for technical purposes such as to enable better navigation through our site. These cookies let our server know that you are continuing a visit to our site. The OMB Memo 10-22 Guidance defines our use of session cookies as "Usage Tier 1-Single Session." The Guidance states, "This tier encompasses any use of single session web measurement and customization technologies."
Persistent Cookies: We use persistent cookies for two reasons: 1) to enable Google's Universal Analytics to differentiate between new and returning visitors to our site, and 2) to block repeated invitations to take the ACSI survey.
A Google's Universal Analytics (a third-party analytics provider) persistent cookie remains on your computer between visits to ED.gov for six months.  Knowing if a user visited ED.gov within the past six months tells us the difference between visitors and "unique visitors" or those who visit our website more than once during this time period).  This is an industry standard and provides high-level information on the breadth of traffic to and content usage of our given digital services.  It is a powerful, invaluable metric because it's the only measure that accurately calculates how many individual users visited ED.gov website in a given time. Combined with total visits, it tells a more comprehensive story about ED.gov users and their visit patterns.
We also use persistent cookies to block repeated invitations to take either the ACSI (American Customer Satisfaction Index) or iPerceptions survey. Based on your usage pattern, you may be asked if you would like to complete a customer survey of our website. The persistent cookie is set to block repeated survey invitations, and it expires in 90 days. Simply put, if you say you don't want to participate in the survey, the cookie will remember this, and will not allow you to be asked again. We feel it is important and respectful to our users not to ask them the same question more than once. The ACSI or iPerceptions survey are customer satisfaction survey tools used by multiple federal agencies and organizations in the private sector. We use these surveys so we can compare ED.gov results to other government agencies and top commercial websites. These surveys enables ED.gov to: measure program performance; identify targets of opportunity; efficiently leverage scarce resources; obtain valuable feedback from our users; focus management's attention on outcomes; and report customer satisfaction results.
The OMB Memo 10-22 Guidance defines our use of persistent cookies as "Usage Tier 2-Multi-session without Personally Identifiable Information (PII)." The Guidance states, "This tier encompasses any use of multi-session Web measurement and customization technologies when no PII is collected."
If you do not wish to have session or persistent cookies stored on your machine, you can opt out or disable cookies in your browser. You will still have access to all information and resources at Department websites. However, turning off cookies may affect the functioning of some Department websites. Be aware that disabling cookies in your browser will affect cookie usage at all other websites you visit as well.
ED.gov uses a third-party analytics provider (Google's Universal Analytics) to analyze the data collected through the session and persistent metrics cookies.  The third-party analytics provider does not receive personally identifiable information through these cookies and does not combine, match, or cross-reference ED.gov information with any other information.  Please review the third-party analytics provider's privacy policy for additional information.
Pursuant OMB Memo 10-22 Guidance Attachment III, V, these cookies collect information similar to that automatically received and stored on the servers hosting ED.gov; they do not collect personally identifiable information.  ED.gov does not access or store the raw information collected through these cookies.  We do view aggregate statistical analyses prepared by our third-party analytics provider, but these analyses do not include any personally identifiable information.  We do not sell, rent, exchange, or otherwise disclose this information to persons or organizations. TOP
4. Information from E-mail You Send to UsIf you decide to send us an electronic mail message (e-mail), the message will usually contain your return e-mail address.  If you include personally-identifying information in your e-mail because you want us to address issues specific to your situation, we may use that information in responding to your request. In other limited circumstances, including requests from Congress or limited other parties, we may be required by law to disclose information that you submit.
Also, e-mail is not necessarily secure against interception.  Please send only information necessary to help us process your request. TOP
5. Information Collected from Interactive FormsOn some of our web pages we offer interactive forms that let you voluntarily submit personal information (such as your e-mail address, name, or organization).  This occurs when you are registering for various conferences, workshops, or training sessions offered by ED, taking student aid counseling quizzes, ordering publications from ED Pubs, or submitting comments to various web discussion forums.  In those cases, all submitted information is used only for the expressed purposes for which it is intended and is not made available to any third party.  However, when you submit a comment to an ED web discussion forum, if you supply your name, e-mail address, or other personal information, that information is posted along with your comment. TOP
6. Links to Other SitesOur policy discloses the privacy practices for the ED website.  But ED provides links to other websites. When you leave the ED website (www.ed.gov), you will be going to sites that are beyond our control.  We try to ensure that links that leave our site are clearly labeled, usually with a  icon. These other sites may send their own cookies to users, collect data, or solicit personal information. The privacy policies and procedures described here for ED do not apply to any external links. We encourage you to read the privacy policies of any site you link to from ours, especially if you share any personal information.  Be informed.  You are the person best qualified to protect your own privacy. TOP
7. Social MediaED is using third-party social media sites to provide ED content in formats that may be useful or interesting; however, ED.gov is the official source of information from the U.S. Department of Education (ED).  ED cannot attest to the accuracy of other information provided by these or any other linked sites.  Using these third-party sites does not constitute an endorsement by ED or any of its employees of the sponsors of the sites or the information or products presented on the sites.  Also, please be aware that the privacy protection provided at ED.gov may not be available on these third-party sites.  Please note that when ED uses social media sites, ED does not collect or in any way use personally identifiable information. TOP
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
The U.S. Department of  Education’s Office for Civil Rights (OCR) enforces, among other statutes,  Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972. Title IX protects people from  discrimination based on sex in education programs or activities that receive  federal financial assistance. Title IX states:
No person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be  denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education  program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.
Title IX applies to  schools, local and state educational agencies, and other institutions that  receive federal financial assistance from the Department. These recipients include  approximately 17,600 local school districts, over 5,000 postsecondary  institutions, and charter schools, for-profit schools, libraries, and museums.  Also included are vocational rehabilitation agencies and education agencies of  50 states, the District of Columbia, and territories of the United States.
A recipient institution that receives Department funds must operate its education program or activity in a nondiscriminatory manner free of discrimination based on sex, including sexual orientation and gender identity. Some key issue areas in which recipients have Title IX obligations are: recruitment, admissions, and counseling; financial assistance; athletics; sex-based harassment, which encompasses sexual assault and other forms of sexual violence; treatment of pregnant and parenting students; treatment of LGBTQI+ students; discipline; single-sex education; and employment. Also, no recipient or other person may intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any individual for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege secured by Title IX or its implementing regulations, or because the individual has made a report or complaint, testified, assisted, or participated or refused to participate in a proceeding under Title IX. For a recipient to retaliate in any way is considered a violation of Title IX. The Department’s Title IX regulations (Volume 34, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 106) provide additional information about the forms of discrimination prohibited by Title IX.
OCR vigorously  enforces Title IX to ensure that institutions that receive federal financial  assistance from the Department comply with the law. OCR evaluates,  investigates, and resolves complaints alleging sex discrimination. OCR also  conducts proactive investigations, through directed investigations or compliance  reviews, to examine potential systemic violations based on sources of  information other than complaints.
In addition to its  enforcement activities, OCR provides information and guidance to schools, universities and other educational  institutions and agencies to assist them in voluntarily complying with the law.
To learn more about  filing a complaint with OCR, please visit https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/complaintintro.html.  For assistance related to Title IX or other civil rights laws, please contact  OCR at OCR@ed.gov or 800-421-3481, TDD 800-877-8339.
On request, this  publication is available in alternate formats, such as Braille or large print.  For more information, please contact the Department’s Alternate Format Center  at 202-260-0818 or via e-mail at alternateformatcenter@ed.gov.  If you have difficulty understanding English,  you may request language assistance services for Department information that is  available to the public. These language assistance services are available free  of charge. If you need more information about interpretation or translation  services, please call 1-800-USA-LEARN (1-800- 872-5327) (TTY: 1-800-877-8339),  email us at Ed.Language.Assistance@ed.gov, or write to U.S. Department of  Education, Information Resource Center, 400 Maryland Ave., SW, Washington, DC  20202.
Recursos de la Oficina Para Derechos Civiles en Español
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
The U.S. Department of  Education’s Office for Civil Rights (OCR) enforces, among other statutes,  Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972. Title IX protects people from  discrimination based on sex in education programs or activities that receive  federal financial assistance. Title IX states:
No person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be  denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education  program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.
Title IX applies to  schools, local and state educational agencies, and other institutions that  receive federal financial assistance from the Department. These recipients include  approximately 17,600 local school districts, over 5,000 postsecondary  institutions, and charter schools, for-profit schools, libraries, and museums.  Also included are vocational rehabilitation agencies and education agencies of  50 states, the District of Columbia, and territories of the United States.
A recipient institution that receives Department funds must operate its education program or activity in a nondiscriminatory manner free of discrimination based on sex, including sexual orientation and gender identity. Some key issue areas in which recipients have Title IX obligations are: recruitment, admissions, and counseling; financial assistance; athletics; sex-based harassment, which encompasses sexual assault and other forms of sexual violence; treatment of pregnant and parenting students; treatment of LGBTQI+ students; discipline; single-sex education; and employment. Also, no recipient or other person may intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any individual for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege secured by Title IX or its implementing regulations, or because the individual has made a report or complaint, testified, assisted, or participated or refused to participate in a proceeding under Title IX. For a recipient to retaliate in any way is considered a violation of Title IX. The Department’s Title IX regulations (Volume 34, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 106) provide additional information about the forms of discrimination prohibited by Title IX.
OCR vigorously  enforces Title IX to ensure that institutions that receive federal financial  assistance from the Department comply with the law. OCR evaluates,  investigates, and resolves complaints alleging sex discrimination. OCR also  conducts proactive investigations, through directed investigations or compliance  reviews, to examine potential systemic violations based on sources of  information other than complaints.
In addition to its  enforcement activities, OCR provides information and guidance to schools, universities and other educational  institutions and agencies to assist them in voluntarily complying with the law.
To learn more about  filing a complaint with OCR, please visit https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/complaintintro.html.  For assistance related to Title IX or other civil rights laws, please contact  OCR at OCR@ed.gov or 800-421-3481, TDD 800-877-8339.
On request, this  publication is available in alternate formats, such as Braille or large print.  For more information, please contact the Department’s Alternate Format Center  at 202-260-0818 or via e-mail at alternateformatcenter@ed.gov.  If you have difficulty understanding English,  you may request language assistance services for Department information that is  available to the public. These language assistance services are available free  of charge. If you need more information about interpretation or translation  services, please call 1-800-USA-LEARN (1-800- 872-5327) (TTY: 1-800-877-8339),  email us at Ed.Language.Assistance@ed.gov, or write to U.S. Department of  Education, Information Resource Center, 400 Maryland Ave., SW, Washington, DC  20202.
Recursos de la Oficina Para Derechos Civiles en Español
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
Get all the information you need to apply for or manage repayment of your federal student loans.
Learn more about grant opportunities, applications, and details about grants awarded.
Find federal education legislation, regulations, guidance, and other policy documents.
Explore and download data and learn about education-related data and research.
Biden-Harris Administration Releases Final Rules that Strengthen Accountability for Colleges and Consumer Protection for Students
U.S. Department of Education’s Office for Civil Rights Announces Resolution of Sex-Based Harassment Investigation of Taft College in California
Biden-Harris Administration Awards $14 Million Under First-Ever Fostering Diverse Schools Demonstration Grant Program
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Legislation, regulations, guidance, and other policy documents can be found here for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), and other topics.
Please note that in the U.S., the federal role in education is limited. Because of the Tenth Amendment, most education policy is decided at the state and local levels.  So, if you have a question about a policy or issue, you may want to check with the relevant organization in your state or school district.
Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (ESEA), as amended
Text of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, as amended through 12/27/22:  PDF (1.2M) |  Text (3.3M)
Disability Discrimination (Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act)
Sex Discrimination (Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972)
Race and National Origin Discrimination (Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964)
OCR Reading Room: Policy Guidance and Other Resources
Text of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (PDF, 529KB)
Text of the Workforce Innovation and Opportunities Act
Foreign Gifts and Contracts--Section 117 of the Higher Education Act of 1965
Electronic Code of Federal Regulations (eCFR), Title 34, Education
Submit a Petition for Rulemaking through Docket ID ED-2023-OGC-0071 on www.regulations.gov
ED’s Instructions for submitting a petition for rulemaking
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
The mission of the Office for Civil Rights is to ensure equal access to education and to promote educational excellence throughout the nation through vigorous enforcement of civil rights.
We serve student populations facing discrimination and the advocates and institutions promoting systemic solutions to civil rights problems.  An important responsibility is resolving complaints of discrimination. Agency-initiated cases, typically called compliance reviews, permit OCR to target resources on compliance problems that appear particularly acute. OCR also provides technical assistance to help institutions achieve voluntary compliance with the civil rights laws that OCR enforces.  An important part of OCR's technical assistance are partnerships designed to develop creative approaches to preventing and addressing discrimination.
The Office for Civil Rights enforces several Federal civil rights laws that
prohibit discrimination in programs or activities that receive federal financial
assistance from the Department of Education. Discrimination on the basis of
race, color, and national origin is prohibited by Title
VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964; sex discrimination is prohibited by
of 1972; discrimination on the basis of disability is prohibited by Section
504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973; and age discrimination is prohibited
Act of 1975. These civil rights laws enforced by OCR extend to all state
education agencies, elementary and secondary school systems, colleges and universities,
vocational schools, proprietary schools, state vocational rehabilitation agencies,
libraries, and museums that receive U.S. Department of Education funds. Areas
covered may include, but are not limited to: admissions, recruitment, financial
aid, academic programs, student treatment and services, counseling and guidance,
discipline, classroom assignment, grading, vocational education, recreation,
physical education, athletics, housing, and employment. OCR also has responsibilities
with Disabilities Act of 1990 (prohibiting disability discrimination by
public entities, whether or not they receive federal financial assistance). To view OCR’s guidance please visit the Policy Guidance Portal.
In addition, as of January 8, 2002, OCR enforces the Boy
Scouts of America Equal Access Act (Section 9525 of the Elementary and Secondary
Education Act of 1965, as amended by the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001).
Under the Boy Scouts of America Equal Access Act, no public elementary school
or State or local education agency that provides an opportunity for one or more
outside youth or community groups to meet on school premises or in school facilities
before or after school hours shall deny equal access or a fair opportunity to
meet to, or discriminate against, any group officially affiliated with the Boy
Scouts of America, or any other youth group listed in Title 36 of the United
A complaint of discrimination can be filed by anyone who believes that an education institution that receives Federal financial assistance has discriminated against someone on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, disability, or age. The person or organization filing the complaint need not be a victim of the alleged discrimination, but may complain on behalf of another person or group.
The Civil Rights Data Collection (CRDC) is a mandatory biennial collection of district-and school-level data. The CRDC is administered by OCR, which uses the data to enforce civil rights statutes that prohibit discrimination based on race, color, national, origin, sex, and disability. The data are collected from public-school districts and public schools in the 50 states, Washington, D.C., and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. The CRDC collects data on civil rights indicators at the early childhood through grade 12 levels. It measures factors that impact education equity and opportunity for students, including student access to courses, programs, resources, instructional and other staff – and school climate factors, such as student discipline and harassment. The CRDC data can be accessed at https://ocrdata.ed.gov. To submit a CRDC data quality concern with OCR, please contact us by emailing ocrdata@ed.gov. Please include “CRDC Data Quality Concern” in the subject heading.
Most of OCR's activities are conducted by its 12 enforcement offices throughout the country. These enforcement offices are organized into 4 divisions carrying out OCR's core work -- preventing, identifying, ending, and remedying discrimination against America's students. Three Enforcement Directors in the office of the Assistant Secretary oversee the work of, respectively, the Eastern and Southern and the Midwestern and Western divisions. OCR administrative offices in Washington, D.C., provide additional administrative support, coordination, policy development and overall leadership.
Recursos de la Oficina Para Derechos Civiles en Español
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
Due to aggressive automated scraping of FederalRegister.gov and eCFR.gov, programmatic access to these sites is limited to access to our extensive developer APIs.
If you are human user receiving this message, we can add your IP address to a set of IPs that can access FederalRegister.gov & eCFR.gov; complete the CAPTCHA (bot test) below and click "Request Access". This process will be necessary for each IP address you wish to access the site from, requests are valid for approximately one quarter (three months) after which the process may need to be repeated.
An official website of the United States government.
If you want to request a wider IP range, first request access for your current IP, and then use the "Site Feedback" button found in the lower left-hand side to make the request.
Since 1968, the U.S. Department of Education (ED) has conducted the Civil Rights Data Collection (CRDC) to collect data on key education and civil rights issues in our nation's public schools. The collection was formerly administered as the Elementary and Secondary School Survey.
The CRDC gathers a variety of information including student enrollment and student’s access to educational programs and services, most of which is disaggregated by race/ethnicity, sex, English learner, and disability. The CRDC is a longstanding and important aspect of the ED Office for Civil Rights (OCR) overall strategy for administering and enforcing the civil rights laws for which it is responsible. Information collected by the CRDC is also used by other ED offices as well as policymakers and researchers outside of ED.
For further general information about the CRDC, visit the CRDC FAQ page.
On April 18, 2023, OCR received approval from the U.S. Office of Management and Budget to require all local educational agencies (LEA) in the country that receive federal financial assistance from ED, including every public school district, charter schools, juvenile justice facilities, alternative schools, and schools serving only students with disabilities, to respond to the CRDC for the 2021-22 and 2023-24 school years. OCR made changes to the CRDC, including, but not limited to the restoration of long-standing and useful data elements that have been collected in previous CRDCs as well as some new data elements. For more details about changes in the  2021-22 and 2023-24 CRDCs, please see 2021-22 Questions and Answers  PDF (183K) and 2023-24 Questions and Answers  PDF (181K). OCR will notify LEAs of the dates when they must submit data for the 2021-22 CRDC.
The 2021-22 CRDC school- and LEA-level survey forms contain instructions, definitions, and table layouts for the 2021-22 CRDC items.
Detailed List of 2021-22 CRDC Data Elements  PDF (266K)
Detailed List of 2023-24 CRDC Data Elements  PDF (143K)
Forum Guide to State Education Agency Support for LEAs in Civil Rights Data Reporting – This guide presents a variety of effective methods through which state education agencies (SEA) can support their LEAs in reporting civil rights data to OCR, and provides several detailed case studies from SEAs that currently support their LEAs with Civil Rights Data Collection reporting.
To access  additional technical assistance resources, please visit the CRDC Resource  Center web site at https://crdc.communities.ed.gov.
Data from the 2000, 2004,  2006, 2009-10, 2011-12, 2013-14, 2015-16, and 2017-18 CRDC surveys are available in the CRDC reporting tool.
For OCR reports on the 2017-18 CRDC (released  in October 2020), visit the 2017-18 CRDC page.
2020-21, 2017-18, 2015-16, 2013-14, 2011-12, and  2009-10 CRDCs
The CRDCs for the 2020-21, 2017-18, 2015-16, 2013-14,  and 2011-12 school years collected data from every public school  and school district in the country that received federal financial assistance from ED. The 2009-10 CRDC collected data from a sample of approximately 7,000 public school districts and over 72,000 public schools.  Resources for the 2020-21, 2017-18, 2015-16, 2013-14, 2011-12, and 2009-10 CRDCs are presented below.
Detailed List of 2020-21 CRDC Data Elements   PDF (313.7K)
Detailed List of 2017-18 CRDC Data Elements  PDF (89K)
Detailed List of 2015-16 CRDC Data Elements  PDF (97K)
Detailed List of 2013-14 CRDC Data Elements  MS WORD (35K)
Civil Rights Data Collection page (for 2017-18) here
Civil Rights Data Collection page (for  2015-16) here
Civil Rights Data Collection page (for  2013-14) here
Data Snapshot: Discipline (March 2014)   PDF (2.10M)
Data Snapshot: Early Learning (March  2014)   PDF (1.6M)
Data Snapshot: College and Career Readiness  (March 2014)   PDF (2.7M)
Data Snapshot: Teacher Equity  (March  2014)  PDF (2.1M)
The Transformed CRDC: Data Summary (March  2012)    PDF (805K)
Gender Equity in Education (June 2012)    PDF (436K)
Gender Equity in Education: Data Note (June  2012)    PDF (208K)
The CRDC data can be accessed at https://ocrdata.ed.gov. If anyone has concerns about the accuracy of the data reported, then please contact us by emailing ocrdata@ed.gov. Please include “CRDC Data Quality Concern” in the subject heading.
For additional information about the CRDC,  please e-mail OCR at ocrdata@ed.gov.
Recursos de la Oficina Para Derechos Civiles en Español
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
Non- Department of Education web sites linked by OCR contain information  			  related to the OCR mission and to civil rights. Non-U.S. Department  			  of Education web sites are linked as a public service only. The  			  Department of Education does not control or guarantee the accuracy,  			  relevance, timeliness, or completeness of this outside information.  			  Inclusion of links to particular resources is not intended to reflect  			  their relative importance, and is not intended as an endorsement  			  of the views expressed, the products or services offered on these  			  outside web sites, or of the organizations sponsoring the web sites.
U.S. Department of Justice, Office of the Attorney General, Civil Rights Division
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office for Civil Rights
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Civil Rights Office
Federal Aviation Administration, Civil Rights Office
U.S. Department of Transportation, Civil Rights Office
U.S. Department of Labor, Civil Rights Enforcement for Department of Labor Grant Recipients
Office of English Language Acquisition, Language Enhancement, and Academic Achievement for Limited English Proficient Students
Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services
Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) Document Center
The Kids.gov:   Official Kid’s Portal for the U.S. Government.  Find links to government and other kids’ sites.
The National Civil Rights Museum Virtual Tour: Civil rights movement from "Brown is Board of Education of Topeka" to current events such as "The Struggle continues". Information about civil rights heroes and heroines.
The NCES Classroom: Find out about education information and activities for students
Gear Up: College information and resources to help low-income students enter and succeed in postsecondary education.
Jobs for Kids Who Like... This is a really cool page that lets you match your interests with possible careers. Sponsored by the Department of Labor.
Explorer’s Club: Lots of interesting things about recycling, plants and animals, air pollution, and the environment. Sponsored by the Environmental Protection Agency.
Ready.gov (Formerly FE-MA Kids): Floods, earthquakes, tornadoes, hurricanes, wild-fires...got your attention? Check out this site! Sponsored by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Forest Service Kids: The Forest Service is committed to connecting kids with nature and the outdoors by providing students, parents and teachers with youth-oriented information and resources related to natural resources and the environment.
Treasury’s Kids Zone: OK - here’s something we all want to know about: money! Find out about savings bonds, learn about how money is made, and even meet some of the dogs who help in drug enforcement. Sponsored by the Treasury Department.
Social Security Kids Stuff: You have heard of "social security" - right? This web site explains how it works. Sponsored by the Social Security Administration.
NASA’s Multimedia Gallery : This is a great collection of photos, videos, and information about our space program. Sponsored by NASA.
Links: You can ask a scientist or engineer your science questions...like how fast do butterflies fly? And how can you tell the age of a tree? Sponsored by the National Science Foundation.
Kids Page: Students  can learn about, Ocean Energy, Ocean’s Sand, and types of Energy and much more.  Sponsored by the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement.
FBI’s Kids Page (Kindergarten to 5th Grade: Find  			  out about fingerprints and lie detectors and DNA testing. Sponsored  			  by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
FBI's  			  Youth Page: Orientation for youth grades 6 to 12 to the  			  work of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Kids’ Page: Find out why laughing is good for you. Games and puzzles and information about environmental health. Don’t know what that is? Then visit this site! Sponsored by the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences.
Learning Web: Take an electronic field trip of Glacier National Park. See maps of the world. Monitor active volcanos. Sponsored by the U.S. Geological Survey.
Air Force Link Junior: Grab your security badge and meet Steve Canyon, Air Force hero! Or send a friend an Air Force post card. Sponsored by the U.S. Air Force.
Planet Youth: Meet Native American artists and learn about Native American customs. Sponsored by the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Just for Kids and Teachers: Visit  the Maritime Administration's Video Theater to see the Ready Reserve Force and America's Marine Transportation System in action and learn about the Adopt-A-Ship program sponsored by The Propeller Club of the United States. Sponsored by the Maritime Administration.
Kids’ Corner: Join the Polar Star ice breaker or read Snoopy’s safe boating tips. It’s all fun! Sponsored by the U.S. Coast Guard.
The National Zoo: Meet new zoo babies, play games, and see pictures of animals. Sponsored by the Smithsonian Institution.
Online Exhibit Hall: See the police plotter showing the assassination of President Abraham Lincoln. See pictures of some of the gifts that our Presidents have received. Sponsored by the National Archives and Records Administration.
Arts edge: You will have a great time looking at the art of students all over the world. Or you can read stories and visit lots of arts-related web sites. Sponsored by the Kennedy Center for Performing Arts.
Interesting Facts from NOAA: Do you know what to do if a storm approaches? Do you know what fish is the largest? Do you know what radiation is? You will learn all this, and more, at this site. Sponsored by the Department of Commerce.
Star Child: If you have ever wanted to be an astronaut, definitely check this out! You will learn about the solar system, the universe, and (ta-da!) space stuff. Sponsored by NASA.
Endorsement, Copyright, Privacy                  and Security of information on the ED Internet site.
Recursos de la Oficina Para Derechos Civiles en Español
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
Legislation, regulations, guidance, and other policy documents can be found here for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), and other topics.
Please note that in the U.S., the federal role in education is limited. Because of the Tenth Amendment, most education policy is decided at the state and local levels.  So, if you have a question about a policy or issue, you may want to check with the relevant organization in your state or school district.
Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (ESEA), as amended
Text of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, as amended through 12/27/22:  PDF (1.2M) |  Text (3.3M)
Disability Discrimination (Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act)
Sex Discrimination (Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972)
Race and National Origin Discrimination (Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964)
OCR Reading Room: Policy Guidance and Other Resources
Text of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (PDF, 529KB)
Text of the Workforce Innovation and Opportunities Act
Foreign Gifts and Contracts--Section 117 of the Higher Education Act of 1965
Electronic Code of Federal Regulations (eCFR), Title 34, Education
Submit a Petition for Rulemaking through Docket ID ED-2023-OGC-0071 on www.regulations.gov
ED’s Instructions for submitting a petition for rulemaking
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
OCR enforces several Federal civil rights laws that prohibit discrimination in programs or activities that receive Federal funds from the Department of Education. These laws prohibit discrimination on the basis of race, color, and national origin, sex, disability, and on the basis of age. These laws extend to all state education agencies, elementary and secondary school systems, colleges and universities, vocational schools, proprietary schools, state vocational rehabilitation agencies, libraries, and museums that receive U.S. Department of Education funds. OCR also has responsibilities under Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (prohibiting disability discrimination by public entities, whether or not they receive federal financial assistance). In addition, as of January 8, 2002, OCR enforces the Boy Scouts of America Equal Access Act (Section 9525 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, as amended by the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001). Under the Boy Scouts of America Equal Access Act, no public elementary or secondary school or State or local education agency that provides an opportunity for one or more outside youth or community groups to meet on school premises or in school facilities shall deny equal access or a fair opportunity to meet to, or discriminate against, any group officially affiliated with the Boy Scouts of America, or any other youth group listed in Title 36 of the United States Code as a patriotic society, that wishes to meet at the school.
Recursos de la Oficina Para Derechos Civiles en Español
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
Select a link below to jump to the relevant page section.
1. Privacy Policy SummaryThank you for visiting the U.S. Department of Education (ED) website and reviewing our privacy policy.  Our policy is simple: We collect no personal information about you unless you choose to provide that information to us. We do not give, share, sell, or transfer any personal information to a third party.
Some of our web pages (such as online publication order forms, conference and training registration forms, web discussion forums) let you voluntarily submit personal information.  In those cases, we will provide a specific notice before you begin submitting any personal information, explaining how your information will be safeguarded.
If you want to know more about how we record non-personal information about your visit or how we use information that you voluntarily submit, read on. TOP
2. Non-personal Information We RecordIf you do nothing during your visit but browse through the website, read pages, or download information, our website's operating system will automatically record some general information about your visit.
During your visit, our web operating system will record:
The Internet domain for your Internet service, such as "xcompany.com" or "xcompany.net" if you use a private Internet access account, or "yourschool.edu" if you connect from a college or university domain.
The type of browser (such as "Netscape version X" or "Internet Explorer version X") that you are using.
The type of operating system that you use (such as Macintosh, Unix, or Windows).
The date and time you visit our site, and the web pages that you visit on our site.
The address of the previous website you were visiting, if you linked to us from another website.
We use this information for statistical analysis, to help us make our site more useful to visitors. This tracking system does not record information about individuals. TOP
3. CookiesThe Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Memo M-10-22:  Guidance for Online Use of Web Measurement and Customization Technologies allows Federal Agencies to use sessions and persistent cookies.”
When you visit any website, its server may generate a piece of text known as a "cookie" to place on your computer. Placing cookie text allows websites to "remember" visitors' preferences, surfing patterns and behavior while they are connected.
The cookie makes it easier for you to use the dynamic features of Web pages. Cookies from ED.gov Web pages only collect information about your browser's visit to the site; they do not collect any personal information about you.
There are two types of cookies, single session (temporary), and multi-session (persistent). Session cookies last only as long as your Web browser is open. Once you close your browser, the cookie disappears. Persistent cookies are stored on your computer for longer periods.
Session Cookies: We use session cookies for technical purposes such as to enable better navigation through our site. These cookies let our server know that you are continuing a visit to our site. The OMB Memo 10-22 Guidance defines our use of session cookies as "Usage Tier 1-Single Session." The Guidance states, "This tier encompasses any use of single session web measurement and customization technologies."
Persistent Cookies: We use persistent cookies for two reasons: 1) to enable Google's Universal Analytics to differentiate between new and returning visitors to our site, and 2) to block repeated invitations to take the ACSI survey.
A Google's Universal Analytics (a third-party analytics provider) persistent cookie remains on your computer between visits to ED.gov for six months.  Knowing if a user visited ED.gov within the past six months tells us the difference between visitors and "unique visitors" or those who visit our website more than once during this time period).  This is an industry standard and provides high-level information on the breadth of traffic to and content usage of our given digital services.  It is a powerful, invaluable metric because it's the only measure that accurately calculates how many individual users visited ED.gov website in a given time. Combined with total visits, it tells a more comprehensive story about ED.gov users and their visit patterns.
We also use persistent cookies to block repeated invitations to take either the ACSI (American Customer Satisfaction Index) or iPerceptions survey. Based on your usage pattern, you may be asked if you would like to complete a customer survey of our website. The persistent cookie is set to block repeated survey invitations, and it expires in 90 days. Simply put, if you say you don't want to participate in the survey, the cookie will remember this, and will not allow you to be asked again. We feel it is important and respectful to our users not to ask them the same question more than once. The ACSI or iPerceptions survey are customer satisfaction survey tools used by multiple federal agencies and organizations in the private sector. We use these surveys so we can compare ED.gov results to other government agencies and top commercial websites. These surveys enables ED.gov to: measure program performance; identify targets of opportunity; efficiently leverage scarce resources; obtain valuable feedback from our users; focus management's attention on outcomes; and report customer satisfaction results.
The OMB Memo 10-22 Guidance defines our use of persistent cookies as "Usage Tier 2-Multi-session without Personally Identifiable Information (PII)." The Guidance states, "This tier encompasses any use of multi-session Web measurement and customization technologies when no PII is collected."
If you do not wish to have session or persistent cookies stored on your machine, you can opt out or disable cookies in your browser. You will still have access to all information and resources at Department websites. However, turning off cookies may affect the functioning of some Department websites. Be aware that disabling cookies in your browser will affect cookie usage at all other websites you visit as well.
ED.gov uses a third-party analytics provider (Google's Universal Analytics) to analyze the data collected through the session and persistent metrics cookies.  The third-party analytics provider does not receive personally identifiable information through these cookies and does not combine, match, or cross-reference ED.gov information with any other information.  Please review the third-party analytics provider's privacy policy for additional information.
Pursuant OMB Memo 10-22 Guidance Attachment III, V, these cookies collect information similar to that automatically received and stored on the servers hosting ED.gov; they do not collect personally identifiable information.  ED.gov does not access or store the raw information collected through these cookies.  We do view aggregate statistical analyses prepared by our third-party analytics provider, but these analyses do not include any personally identifiable information.  We do not sell, rent, exchange, or otherwise disclose this information to persons or organizations. TOP
4. Information from E-mail You Send to UsIf you decide to send us an electronic mail message (e-mail), the message will usually contain your return e-mail address.  If you include personally-identifying information in your e-mail because you want us to address issues specific to your situation, we may use that information in responding to your request. In other limited circumstances, including requests from Congress or limited other parties, we may be required by law to disclose information that you submit.
Also, e-mail is not necessarily secure against interception.  Please send only information necessary to help us process your request. TOP
5. Information Collected from Interactive FormsOn some of our web pages we offer interactive forms that let you voluntarily submit personal information (such as your e-mail address, name, or organization).  This occurs when you are registering for various conferences, workshops, or training sessions offered by ED, taking student aid counseling quizzes, ordering publications from ED Pubs, or submitting comments to various web discussion forums.  In those cases, all submitted information is used only for the expressed purposes for which it is intended and is not made available to any third party.  However, when you submit a comment to an ED web discussion forum, if you supply your name, e-mail address, or other personal information, that information is posted along with your comment. TOP
6. Links to Other SitesOur policy discloses the privacy practices for the ED website.  But ED provides links to other websites. When you leave the ED website (www.ed.gov), you will be going to sites that are beyond our control.  We try to ensure that links that leave our site are clearly labeled, usually with a  icon. These other sites may send their own cookies to users, collect data, or solicit personal information. The privacy policies and procedures described here for ED do not apply to any external links. We encourage you to read the privacy policies of any site you link to from ours, especially if you share any personal information.  Be informed.  You are the person best qualified to protect your own privacy. TOP
7. Social MediaED is using third-party social media sites to provide ED content in formats that may be useful or interesting; however, ED.gov is the official source of information from the U.S. Department of Education (ED).  ED cannot attest to the accuracy of other information provided by these or any other linked sites.  Using these third-party sites does not constitute an endorsement by ED or any of its employees of the sponsors of the sites or the information or products presented on the sites.  Also, please be aware that the privacy protection provided at ED.gov may not be available on these third-party sites.  Please note that when ED uses social media sites, ED does not collect or in any way use personally identifiable information. TOP
8. Questions?If you have questions about this policy, please contact webmaster@ed.gov.
If you would like more information  about ED’s privacy program, visit our Privacy  Program Page.
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
Since the attached Title IX Legal Manual was issued in 2001, sex discrimination jurisprudence has developed significantly.  Notably, on June 15, 2020, the Supreme Court held in Bostock v. Clayton County that sex discrimination under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. (Title VII) encompasses discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and transgender status.  140 S. Ct. 1731, 1741, 590 U.S. ___, ___ (2020).
Though Title VII and Title IX are two distinct statutes, their statutory prohibitions against sex discrimination are similar, such that Title VII jurisprudence is frequently used as a guide to inform Title IX.  See Manual, Chapters I, IV.  Indeed, in the months following the Bostock decision, several federal courts have reached the same conclusion as to Title IX, holding that Title IX protects transgender students from discrimination on the basis of gender identity.  See, e.g., Grimm v. Gloucester Cty. Sch. Bd., 972 F.3d 586, 616-17 (4th Cir. 2020) (“Although Bostock interprets [Title VII], it guides our evaluation of claims under Title IX.”), as amended (Aug. 28, 2020), reh’g en banc denied, 976 F. 3d 399 (4th Cir. 2020), cert. denied, No. 20-1163 (June 28, 2021); B.P.J. v. W. Virginia State Bd. of Educ., No. 2:21-CV-00316, 2021 WL 3081883, at *7 (S.D.W. Va. July 21, 2021); Koenke v. Saint Joseph's Univ., No. CV 19-4731, 2021 WL 75778, at *2 (E.D. Pa. Jan. 8, 2021); Doe v. Univ. of Scranton, No. 3:19-CV-01486, 2020 WL 5993766, at *11 n.61 (M.D. Pa. Oct. 9, 2020).  Other circuits reached this conclusion before Bostock, relying on their own Title VII jurisprudence.  See Whitaker By Whitaker v. Kenosha Unified Sch. Dist. No. 1 Bd. of Educ., 858 F.3d 1034, 1049-50 (7th Cir. 2017) (transgender boy was likely to succeed on his claim that school district violated Title IX by excluding him from the boys’ restroom); Dodds v. U.S. Dep’t of Educ., 845 F.3d 217, 221-22 (6th Cir. 2016) (per curiam) (school district that sought to exclude transgender girl from girls’ restroom was not likely to succeed on the claim because Title IX prohibits discrimination based on sex stereotyping and gender nonconformity).
On March 26, 2021, the Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General for the Civil Rights Division issued a memorandum to federal civil rights offices and general counsels addressing the application of Bostock to Title IX, determining that Title IX’s prohibition on discrimination “on the basis of sex” includes discrimination on the basis of gender identity and sexual orientation.  See Letter from Pamela S. Karlan, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General for the Civil Rights Division, to Federal Civil Rights Directors and General Counsels (Mar. 26, 2021), https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/correspondence/stakeholders/educator-202106-tix.pdf.
The reasoning in these interpretations applies with equal force to discrimination against intersex people.  “Intersex” refers to people born with variations in physical sex characteristics—including genitals, gonads, chromosomes, and hormonal factors—that do not fit typical definitions of male or female bodies.  The Bostock Court addressed discrimination against “persons with one sex identified at birth and another today.”  140 S. Ct. at 1747.  Discrimination against intersex individuals is similarly motivated by perceived differences between an individual’s specific sex characteristics and their sex category (either as identified at birth or some subsequent time).  Additionally, discrimination based on anatomical or physiological sex characteristics (such as genitals, gonads, chromosomes, and hormone function) is inherently sex-based.  Intersex traits, like gender identity and sexual orientation, are “inextricably bound up with” sex.  See id. at 1742.  In other words, it is impossible to discuss intersex status without also referring to sex.  Cf. Grimm, 972 F.3d at 609.  Lastly, discrimination based on intersex traits may also involve sex stereotypes, as intersex people by definition have traits that do not conform to stereotypes about male or female bodies.  Cf. Whitaker, 858 F.3d at 1048 (“[A] transgender individual does not conform to the sex-based stereotypes of the sex that [they were] assigned at birth.”)
While this Manual is not intended to provide a complete, comprehensive directory of all cases or issues related to Title IX, these important developments are highlighted here to clarify the Department’s position that Title IX’s prohibition on sex discrimination includes discrimination based on gender identity, intersex traits, and sexual orientation.
It is intended that this manual will be updated periodically to reflect significant changes in the law. Comments on this publication, and suggestions as to future updates, including published and unpublished cases, may be addressed to:
This Manual is intended only to provide guidance on general principles related to Title IX enforcement outside the context of traditional educational institutions. It is not intended to, does not, and may not be relied upon to create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by any party against the United States.
In June 1972, President Nixon signed Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 into law. Title IX is a comprehensive federal law that has removed many barriers that once prevented people, on the basis of sex, from participating in educational opportunities and careers of their choice. It states that:
No person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation, in be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.
20 U.S.C. ï½§ 1681, et seq. Title IX applies to all aspects of education programs or activities operated by recipients of federal financial assistance.1 In addition to educational institutions such as colleges, universities, and elementary and secondary schools, Title IX also applies to any education or training program operated by a recipient of federal financial assistance. For example, Title IX would cover such diverse activities as a forestry workshop run by a state park receiving funds from the Department of Interior; a boater education program sponsored by a county parks and recreation department receiving funding from the Coast Guard; a local course concerning how to start a small business, sponsored by the state department of labor that receives funding from the Small Business Administration; state and local courses funded by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in planning how to deal with disasters; and vocational training for inmates in prisons receiving assistance from the Department of Justice (hereinafter referred to as "DOJ" or "Justice Department" or "the Department"). Generally, it covers all aspects of the education program, including admissions, treatment of participants, and employment. Title IX guarantees equal educational opportunity in federally funded programs.
The two statutes both condition an offer of federal funding on a promise by the recipient not to discriminate, in what is essentially a contract between the government and the recipient of funds. Because of this close connection between the statutes, Title VI legal precedent provides some important guidance for the application of Title IX. See, e.g., Cannon v. University of Chicago, 441 U.S. 677, 694-98 (1979)(Congress intended that Title IX would be interpreted and applied as Title VI has been). Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability in federally funded programs, was also modeled after Title VI and, hence, may also provide guidance for an analysis of Title IX. See Alexander v. Choate, 469 U.S. 287, 294 (1985)(Because Title IX, Section 504, and Title VI contain parallel language, the same analytic framework should generally apply in cases under all three statutes). These statutes were enacted to prevent unlawful discrimination and to provide remedies for the effects of past discrimination.
Additional Title IX exemptions include the membership policies of certain university-based social fraternities and sororities, the Girl and Boy Scouts, the YMCA and YWCA, the Camp Fire Girls and certain other voluntary single-sex and tax-exempt youth service organizations whose members are chiefly under age 19.
In addition to the statutory exemptions discussed above, the Title IX common rule contains a few other exceptions permitting single-sex programs under certain limited circumstances. For example, section ___.110(a)requires appropriate remedial action if a designated agency official finds that a recipient has discriminated against persons on the basis of sex. In the absence of a finding of discrimination, section ___.110(b) permits affirmative action consistent with law to overcome the effects of conditions that resulted in limited participation in a program by persons of a particular sex. Either of these provisions could permit single-sex programs under appropriate circumstances. In addition, several other regulatory provisions permit single-sex programs: section ___.415(b)(5) permits portions of education programs or activities that deal exclusively with human sexuality to be conducted in separate sessions for boys and girls; section ___.445(b) permits a program offered to pregnant students on a voluntary basis that is comparable to that offered to non-pregnant students; sections ___.414(b)(2) and (6) permit recipients to make requirements based on objective standards of physical ability or of vocal range or quality; and section __ .415(b)(3) permits separation by sex in physical education classes involving contact sports. In addition, section 420(b) permits exclusion, on the basis of sex, of any person from admission to a nonvocational school operated by a local education agency, so long as "...such recipient otherwise makes available to such person, pursuant to the same policies and criteria of admission, courses, services, and facilities comparable to each course, service, and facility offered in or through such schools." 4
The Title IX regulations contain a variety of procedural requirements, the most important of which is the requirement to establish grievance procedures. The regulations require that every recipient to which Title IX applies "adopt and publish grievance procedures providing for prompt and equitable resolution of student and employee complaints alleging any action that be prohibited by these Title IX regulations." ï½§ ___.135. These grievance procedures are an essential element in ensuring that Title IX and its implementing regulations are complied with in the least contentious manner possible.5
Congress enacted Title IX with two principal objectives in mind: to avoid the use of federal resources to support discriminatory practices in education programs, and to provide individual citizens effective protection against those practices.See Cannon v. University of Chicago, 441 U.S. 677, 704 (1979).
A year later, Title IX began its congressional life in earnest when an amendment was introduced in the Senate by Senator Birch Bayh of Indiana, who explained that its purpose was to combat "the continuation of corrosive and unjustified discrimination against women in the American educational system." 118 Cong. Rec. 5803 (1972). During debate, Senator Bayh stressed the fact that economic inequities suffered by women can often be traced to educational inequities. In support of the amendment, Senator Bayh pointed to the link between discrimination in education and subsequent employment opportunities:
The field of education is just one of many areas where differential treatment [between men and women] has been documented but because education provides access to jobs and financial security, discrimination here is doubly destructive for women. Therefore, a strong and comprehensive measure is needed to provide women with solid legal protection from the persistent, pernicious discrimination which is serving to perpetuate second-class citizenship for American women.
Congressional activity on the issue increased with the introduction of various proposals in the House and Senate to end sex discrimination in education. Although there was growing consensus that sex discrimination in education should end, there was little agreement as to the best methods for reaching that goal. Some critics claimed that the legislation was intended to try to maintain a certain quota or ratio of male to female students. Senator Bayh reiterated many times during the debate that "the amendment is not designed to require specific quotas. The thrust of the amendment is to do away with every quota." 117 Cong. Rec. 30,409 (1971). The Senator went on to state that, "The language of my amendment does not require reverse discrimination. It only requires that each individual be judged on merit, without regard to sex." Id.
Despite this lengthy process, Title IX was passed without much debate as to several of its key exemption provisions. For example, early on it was unclear whether Congress intended to regulate intercollegiate athletics. For this reason, the statute was amended in 1974 to direct the Department of Health Education and Welfare to publish proposed implementing regulations, with a provision stating that such regulations shall include with respect to intercollegiate athletic activities, reasonable provisions considering the nature of the particular sports.7
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require or prohibit any person, or public or private entity, to provide or pay for any benefit or services, including the use of facilities, related to an abortion. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit a penalty to be imposed on any person or individual because such person or individual is seeking or has received any benefit or service related to a legal abortion. 20 U.S.C. ï½§1688.
Consistent with the Danforth Amendment, the Title IX common rule does not require or prohibit any person, or public or private entity, to provide or pay for any benefit or service, including the use of facilities, related to an abortion. However, medical procedures, benefits, services, and the use of facilities, necessary to save the life of a pregnant woman or to address complications related to an abortion are not subject to this section. 65 Fed. Reg. 52869 (2000)(Section __.235(d)(1)). Moreover, the Title IX common rule prohibits a recipient from discriminating against, excluding, or denying benefits to a person because that person has obtained, sought, or will seek an abortion. This prohibition applies to any service or benefit for an applicant (for enrollment or employment), student, or employee. 65 Fed. Reg. 52869 (2000)(Section __.235(d)(2)).
In addition, the CRRA expanded the exemption for entities controlled by religious organizations. Under the CRRA, the exemption is no longer limited to educational institutions that are controlled by religious organizations with tenets contrary to Title IX. Instead, any educational operation of an entity may be exempt from Title IX due to control by a religious organization with tenets that are not consistent with the provisions of Title IX. Further, the exemption would apply to a particular education program operated by a recipient if this separate program is subject to religious tenets that are not consistent with Title IX.
An educational institution or other entity that wishes to claim the exemption set forth in paragraph (a) of this section shall do so by submitting in writing to the designated agency official a statement by the highest-ranking official of the institution, identifying the provisions of these Title IX regulations that conflict with a specific tenet of the religious organization.
Section ___.205(b). The preamble to the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking of the Title IX common rule explains that if a recipient has already obtained an exemption from the Department of Education, such exemption may be submitted to another funding agency as a basis for an exemption from the second funding agency. 64 Fed. Reg. 58570 (1999).
Title IX requires that agencies promulgate regulations to provide guidance to recipients of federal financial assistance who administer education programs or activities on Title IX enforcement. After the passage of Title IX, the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW) adopted implementing regulations. 40 Fed. Reg. 24128 (1975). When HEW split in 1980 into two departments, the Department of Education and the Department of Health and Human Services, each new agency adopted the regulations. See 34 C.F.R. Part 106 and 45 C.F.R. Part 86, respectively. Two other federal agencies, the Department of Agriculture and the Department of Energy, also published Title IX rules around that same time.9
On October 29, 1999 the Department of Justice and 23 other agencies published a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking to implement Title IX. See 64 Fed. Reg. 58567 (1999). In the Title IX common rule, the substantive nondiscrimination obligations of recipients, for the most part, are identical to those established by the Department of Education under Title IX. However, the rule reflects statutory changes to Title IX, such as those resulting from passage of the CRRA, and modifications to ensure consistency with Supreme Court precedent. After receiving and reviewing comments, and making a few additional changes to the regulations in response to these comments, the Department of Justice and 20 other participating agencies published the final Title IX common rule on August 30, 2000.10 See 65 Fed. Reg. 52857 (2000).
(ii) Scholarships, loans, grants, wages, or other funds extended to any entity for payment to or on behalf of students admitted to that entity, or extended directly to such students for payment to that entity
(2) A grant of Federal real or personal property or any interest therein, including surplus property, and the proceeds of the sale or transfer of such property, if the Federal share of the fair market value of the property is not, upon such sale or transfer, properly accounted for to the Federal Government.
(4) Sale or lease of Federal property or any interest therein at nominal consideration, or at consideration reduced for the purpose of assisting the recipient or in recognition of public interest to be served thereby, or permission to use Federal property or any interest therein without consideration
65 Fed. Reg. 52866 (2000).13 No extended discussion is necessary to show that money, through federal grants, cooperative agreements and loans, is federal financial assistance within the meaning of Title IX. See Paralyzed Veterans, 477 U.S. at 607 n.11. For example:
United States military veterans are enrolled at Holy University, a private, religious university. The veterans receive payments from the federal government for educational pursuits and such monies are used by the veterans to pay a portion of their respective tuition payments at Holy University. Although federal payments are direct to the veterans and indirect to Holy University, the university is receiving federal financial assistance.
As set forth in the Title IX common rule, federal financial assistance may be in the form of a grant of land or use (rental) of federal property for the recipient at no or reduced cost. Since the recipient pays nothing or a lower amount for ownership of land or rental of property, the recipient is being assisted financially by the federal agency. Typically, assurances state that this type of assistance is considered to be ongoing for as long as the land or property is being used for the original or a similar purpose for which such assistance was intended. E.g., 65 Fed. Reg. 52867 at ï½§__.115. Moreover, regulations also generally bind the successors and transferees of this property, as long as the original purpose, or a similar objective, is pursued. 65 Fed. Reg. 52867 at ï½§ .115. Thus, if the recipient uses the land or rents property for the same purpose at the time of the alleged discriminatory act, the recipient is receiving federal financial assistance, irrespective of when the land was granted or donated.
Sixteen years ago, the Department of Defense (DOD) donated land from a closed military base to a State social services agency as the location for a training facility for caseworkers. The training facility has been built and is in use by the State. Students at the training facility allege sexual harassment against certain training facilitators. Because the State still uses the land donated to it by the DOD for its original (or similar purpose), the State is still receiving federal financial assistance from DOD and DOD has jurisdiction to investigate the complaint under Title IX. See 32 C.F.R. ï½§ 195.6.
A police department has a training facility located in a housing project built, subsidized, and operated with Housing and Urban Development (HUD) funds. The police department is not charged rent. Thus, the police department is receiving federal financial assistance and is subject to Title IX.
Under the Intergovernmental Personnel Act of 1970, federal agencies may allow a temporary assignment of personnel to State, local, and Indian tribal governments, institutions of higher education, federally funded research and development centers, and certain other organizations for work of mutual concern and benefit. See 5 U.S.C. ï½§ 3372. This detail of federal personnel to a State or other entity is considered federal financial assistance, even if the entity reimburses the federal agency for some of the detailed employee's federal salary. See Paralyzed Veterans, 477 U.S. at 612 n.14. However, if the State or other entity fully reimburses the federal agency for the employee's salary, it is unlikely that the entity receives federal financial assistance. For example:
Two research scientists from the National Institute of Health (NIH) are detailed to a university research organization for two years to help research treatments for cancer. NIH pays for three-fourths of the salary of the two detailed employees, while the organization pays the remaining portion. The research organization is considered to be receiving federal financial assistance since the federal government is paying a substantial portion of the salary of the detailed federal employees. The research organization is thus now subject to Title IX.
Federal financial assistance may be received directly or indirectly.14 For example, colleges indirectly receive federal financial assistance when they accept students who pay, in part, with federal financial aid directly distributed to the students. Grove City College v. Bell, 465 U.S. 555, 564 (1984)15; see also Bob Jones Univ. v. Johnson, 396 F. Supp. 597, 603 (D. S.C. 1974), aff'd, 529 F.2d 514 (4th Cir. 1975). In Bob Jones Univ., 396 F. Supp. at 603, cited with approval in Grove City, 465 U.S. at 564, the university was deemed to have received federal financial assistance for participating in a program wherein veterans received monies directly from the Veterans Administration to support approved educational pursuits, although the veterans were not required to use the specific federal monies to pay the schools for tuition and expenses. Bob Jones Univ., 396 F. Supp. at 602-03 & n.22. Even if the financial aid to the veterans did not reach the university, the court considered this financial assistance to the school since this released the school's funds for other purposes. Id. at 602. Thus, an entity may be deemed to have "received Federal financial assistance" even if the entity did not show a "financial gain, in the sense of a net increment in its assets." Id. at 602-03. Aid such as this, and noncapital grants, are equally federal financial assistance. Id.
Similarly, statutory programs or regulations that directly or indirectly support, or establish guidelines for, an entity's operations are not federal financial assistance. Herman, 60 F.3d at 1382 (Neither Labor regulations establishing apprenticeship programs nor Davis-Bacon Act wage protections are federal financial assistance.); Steptoe v. Savings of America, 800 F. Supp. 1542, 1548 (N.D. Ohio 1992) (Mortgage lender subject to federal banking laws does not receive federal financial assistance.); Rannels v. Hargrove, 731 F. Supp. 1214, 1222-23 (E.D. Pa. 1990) (federal bank regulations are not federal financial assistance under the Age Discrimination Act).
Furthermore, programs "owned and operated" by the federal government, such as the air traffic control system, do not constitute federal financial assistance. Paralyzed Veterans, 477 U.S. at 612; Jacobson v. Delta Airlines, 742 F.2d 1202, 1213 (9th Cir. 1984) (air traffic control and national weather service programs do not constitute federal financial assistance).16110 Cong. Rec. 13380 (1964).
It also should be noted that while contracts of guaranty and insurance may constitute federal financial assistance, Title IX specifically states that it does not apply to contracts of insurance or guaranty. See 20 U.S.C. ï½§ 1682; see Gallagher v. Croghan Colonial Bank, 89 F.3d 275, 277-78 (6th Cir. 1996) (Default insurance for bank's disbursement of federal student loans is a "contract of insurance," and excluded from Section 504 coverage by agency regulations). But see Moore v. Sun Bank, 923 F.2d 1423, 1427 (11th Cir. 1991) (loans guaranteed by the Small Business Administration constituted federal financial assistance since Section 504 does not exclude contracts of insurance or guarantee from coverage as does Title IX).
Procurement contracts also are not considered federal financial assistance. DeVargas v. Mason & Hanger-Silas Mason Co., 911 F.2d 1377 (10th Cir. 1990); Jacobson, 742 F.2d at 1209; Muller v. Hotsy Corp., 917 F. Supp. 1389, 1418 (N.D. Iowa 1996) (procurement contract by company with GSA to provide supplies is not federal financial assistance); Hamilton v. Illinois Cent. R.R. Co., 894 F. Supp. 1014, 1020 (S.D. Miss. 1995). A distinction must be made between procurement contracts at fair market value and subsidies; the former is not federal financial assistance although the latter is. Jacobson, 742 F.2d at 1209; Mass v. Martin Marietta Corp., 805 F. Supp. 1530, 1542 (D. Co. 1992) (federal payments for goods pursuant to a contract, even if greater than fair market value, do not constitute federal financial assistance). As described in Jacobson and followed in DeVargas, there need not be a detailed analysis of whether a contract is at fair market value, but instead a focus on whether the government intended to provide a subsidy to the contractor. DeVargas, 911 F.2d at 1382-83; Jacobson, 742 F.2d at 1210. In DeVargas, a Department of Energy contract, issued through a competitive bidding process after a determination that a private entity could provide the service in a less costly manner, evidenced no intention to provide a subsidy to the contractor. Id. at 1382-83. For example:
Dept. of Transportation (DOT) contracts with TechStuff, a private company that provides training on the use of computers for a subway system. Under the contract, full price is paid by DOT for the training to be provided by TechStuff. Because this is a direct procurement contract by the federal government, the funds paid to TechStuff by DOT do not subject TechStuff to Title IX.
A "recipient" is an entity that receives federal financial assistance and that operates "an education program or activity," and is thus subject to Title IX. The Title IX common rule provides as follows:
The term recipient means any State or political subdivision thereof, or any instrumentality of a State or political subdivision thereof, any public or private agency, institution, or organization, or other entity, or any person, to whom Federal financial assistance is extended directly or through another recipient and that operates an education program or activity that receives such assistance, including any subunit, successor, assignee, or transferee thereof.
Several aspects of the plain language of the regulations should be noted. First, a recipient may be a public (e.g., a State, local or municipal agency) or a private entity. Second, Title IX does not apply to the federal government. Therefore, a federal agency cannot be considered a "recipient" within the meaning of Title IX. Third, there may be more than one recipient in a program of federal financial assistance; that is, a primary recipient (e.g., State agency) that transfers or distributes assistance to a subrecipient (local entity) for distribution to an ultimate beneficiary.18 Fourth, a recipient also encompasses a successor, transferee, or assignee of the federal assistance (property or otherwise), under certain circumstances. Fifth, as discussed in detail below, there is a distinction between a recipient and a beneficiary. Finally, although not addressed in the regulations, a recipient may receive federal assistance either directly from the federal government or indirectly through a third party, who is not necessarily another recipient. For example, schools are indirect recipients when they accept payments from students who directly receive federal financial aid.
The clearest means of identifying a "recipient" of federal financial assistance covered by Title IX is to determine whether the entity has voluntarily entered into a direct relationship with the federal government and receives federal assistance under a condition or assurance of compliance with Title IX. See Paralyzed Veterans, 477 U.S. at 605-606.
By limiting coverage to recipients, Congress imposes the obligations of ï½§ 504 [and Title IX] upon those who are in a position to accept or reject those obligations as part of the decision whether or not to "receive" federal funds.
Id. at 606; see also Soberal-Perez, 717 F.2d at 40-41. It is important to note that, by signing an assurance, the recipient is committing itself to complying with nondiscrimination mandates.19 Even without a written assurance, courts describe obligations under nondiscrimination laws as similar to a contract, and have thus concluded that "the recipients' acceptance of the funds triggers coverage under the nondiscrimination provision." Paralyzed Veterans, 477 U.S. at 605. In this scenario, the recipient has a direct relationship with the funding agency and, therefore, is subject to the requirements of Title IX. For example:
Six years ago, LegalSkool, a law school at a university, was built partly with federal grants, loans, and interest subsidies in excess of $7 million from the Department of Education (ED). The law school is a "recipient" because of the funding from ED for construction purposes.
While showing that the entity directly receives a federal grant, loan, or contract (other than a contract of insurance or guaranty) is the easiest means of identifying a Title IX recipient, this direct cash flow does not describe the full reach of Title IX.20
A recipient may receive funds either directly or indirectly. Grove City College, 465 U.S. at 564-65.21 For example, educational institutions receive federal financial assistance indirectly when they accept students who pay, in part, with federal loans. Although the money is paid directly to the students, the universities and other educational institutions are the indirect recipients. Id.; Bob Jones Univ., 396 F. Supp. at 602.
In contrast, as subsequently explained by the Supreme Court in Paralyzed Veterans, it is essential to distinguish aid that flows indirectly to a recipient from aid to a recipient that reaches a beneficiary.
While Grove City stands for the proposition that Title IX coverage extends to Congress' intended recipient, whether receiving the aid directly or indirectly, it does not stand for the proposition that federal coverage follows the aid past the recipient to those who merely benefit from the aid.
Along these lines, the Supreme Court in NCAA v. Smith, 525 U.S. 459, 470 (1999), citing both Grove City and Paralyzed Veterans, stated that while dues paid to an entity (NCAA) by colleges and universities, who were recipients of federal financial assistance, "at most ... demonstrates that it [NCAA] indirectly benefits from the federal assistance afforded its afforded members." But the Court stated, "This showing, without more, is insufficient to trigger Title IX coverage. Smith, 525 U.S. at 468.22
Furthermore, Title IX regulations provide that land originally acquired through a program receiving federal financial assistance must include a covenant binding on subsequent purchasers or transferees that requires nondiscrimination for as long as the land is used for the original or a similar purpose for which the federal assistance is extended. 65 Fed. Reg. 52867 at ï½§ .115 (2000).23
Many programs have two recipients. The primary recipient directly receives the federal financial assistance. The primary recipient then distributes the federal assistance to a subrecipient to carry out a program. Both the primary recipient and subrecipient must conform their actions to Title IX (and other nondiscrimination laws). For example:
A State agency, such as the Department of Children and Family Services, receives a substantial portion of its funding from the federal government. The State agency, as the primary recipient or conduit, in turn, funds local social service organizations, in part, with its federal funds. The local agencies receive federal financial assistance, and thus are subject to Section 504 (and other nondiscrimination laws). See Graves v. Methodist Youth Servs., Inc., 624 F. Supp. 429 (N.D. Ill. 1985).24 Education programs conducted by the State Department of Children and Family Services and by the local social service organizations are all covered by Title IX.
A recipient may not absolve itself of its Title IX and other nondiscrimination obligations by hiring a contractor or agent to perform or deliver assistance to beneficiaries. Agency regulations consistently state that prohibitions against discriminatory conduct, whether intentional or through sex neutral means with an unjustified disparate impact, apply to a recipient, whether committed "directly or through contractual or other arrangements." E.g., 28 C.F.R. ï½§ï½§ 42.104(b)(1), (2) (emphasis added). For example:
A recipient department of corrections contracts with a tutoring company to provide vocational training to inmates. Employees of the contractor refuse to admit female prisoners to a welding training class the contractor is conducting. The recipient is liable under Title IX for the contractor's actions as the contractor is performing a program function of the recipient.
One also should evaluate the agency's assurances or certifications; such documents can provide an independent basis to seek enforcement. For example, the assurance for the Office of Justice Programs, within the Department of Justice, states, inter alia,
An assistance program may have many beneficiaries, that is, individuals and/or entities that directly or indirectly receive an advantage through the operation of a federal program. Beneficiaries, however, do not enter into any formal contract or agreement or sign an assurance with the federal government where compliance with Title VI (or Title IX) is a condition of receiving the assistance. Paralyzed Veterans, 477 U.S. at 606-607.
In almost any major federal program, Congress may intend to benefit a large class of persons, yet it may do so by funding - that is, extending federal financial assistance to - a limited class of recipients. Section 504, like Title IX in Grove City, 465 U.S. 555 (1984), draws the line of federal regulatory coverage between the recipient and the beneficiary.
Id. at 609-10. Title IX was meant to cover only those situations where federal funding is given to a non-federal entity which, in turn, provides financial assistance to the ultimate beneficiary, or disburses federal assistance to another recipient for ultimate distribution to a beneficiary.25 It is important to note that the Supreme Court has firmly established that the receipt of student loans or grants by an entity renders the entity a recipient of federal financial assistance. See Grove City 465 U.S. at 569.
In Paralyzed Veterans, a Section 504 case decided under Department of Transportation regulations, the Court held that commercial airlines that used airports and gained an advantage from the capital improvements and construction at airports were beneficiaries, and not recipients, under the airport improvement program. The airport operators, in contrast, directly receive the federal financial assistance for the airport construction. The Court examined the program statutes and concluded:
Congress recognized a need to improve airports in order to benefit a wide variety of persons and entities, all of them classified together as beneficiaries. [note omitted]. Congress did not set up a system where passengers were the primary or direct beneficiaries, and all others benefitted by the Acts are indirect recipients of the financial assistance to airports....The statute covers only those who receive the aid, but does not extend as far as those who benefit from it....Congress tied the regulatory authority to those programs or activities that receive federal financial assistance.
As explained below, outside the context of traditional educational institutions, a fact-specific inquiry is required to determine which portions of a covered program or activity are educational, and thus covered by Title IX. In light of the broad sweep envisioned for Title IX, and the expansive notion of institution-wide coverage mandated by the CRRA, such inquiries must be made as broadly as possible.
Before examining the question of what constitutes a covered education program or activity under Title IX, as amended by the CRRA, it is helpful to take a closer look at the CRRA and the expansive definition of "program" and "program or activity" enacted by this amendment.
(B) the entity of such state or local government that distributes such assistance and each such department or agency (and each other State or local government entity) to which the assistance is extended, in the case of assistance to a State or local government;
(B) the entire plant or other comparable, geographically separate facility to which Federal financial assistance is extended, in the case of any other corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship; or
It is clear that the CRRA was designed to establish broad institution-wide coverage for Title IX, Title VI, Section 504, and the Age Discrimination Act. However, by defining only "program or activity," the CRRA did not directly address the question of how to interpret the modifier "education" for purposes of Title IX coverage. As a result, coverage under Title IX involves an issue of statutory interpretation that does not arise for the other three civil rights statutes, namely: to what extent does "education" provide a limitation on the concept of institution-wide coverage embodied in the CRRA?
If a private hospital corporation is extended federal assistance for its emergency rooms, all the operations of the hospital, including for example, the operating rooms, the pediatrics department, admissions, discharge offices, etc., are covered by Title VI, Section 504, and the Age Discrimination Act. Since Title IX is limited to education programs or activities, it would apply only to the students and employees of education programs operated by the hospital, if any.
In conducting such factual inquiries, it is important to remember that determinations as to what constitutes a covered education program must be made as broadly as possible. This principle is consistent with both the broad sweep of coverage originally envisioned for Title IX as well as the expansive notion of institution-wide coverage mandated by the CRRA.
Notably, the Ninth Circuit has concluded that it is appropriate to conduct just such a fact-specific inquiry in order to determine the proper scope of coverage under Title IX. In Jeldness v. Pearce, 30 F.3d 1220 (9th Cir. 1994), the court determined that whether various components of a correctional facility, such as the prison industries, the farm annex, or the forest work camp, constituted an "educational" program within the meaning of Title IX was a question of fact. Jeldness, 30 F.3d at 1226.
Title IX was modeled after Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and they both share a common purpose: to ensure that public funds derived from all the people are not utilized in ways that encourage, subsidize, permit, or result in prohibited discrimination against some of the people.29 Towards that end, both Title VI and Title IX broadly prohibit conduct by a recipient of federal financial assistance that results in a person being "excluded from participation in, . . . denied the benefits of, or . . . subjected to discrimination under" a federally-assisted program or activity.30
Title IX, like Title VI, recognizes three general types of prohibited discrimination: (1) disparate treatment, (2) disparate impact, and (3) retaliation. Any effective and meaningful administrative enforcement program under Title IX must be prepared to address all three.
Disparate treatment33 refers to actions that treat similarly situated persons differently on the basis of a prohibited classification. In the case of Title IX, the prohibited classification is sex. Under the disparate treatment theory of discrimination, the core question is whether a recipient, through its officials, has treated people differently on the basis of sex. Here, the applicable legal standards under Title VI and Title IX are generally identical and investigative officials can rely on case law decided under Title VI in establishing violations under Title IX.34
Evidence of discriminatory intent may be direct or circumstantial and may be found from various sources, including statements by decision makers, the historical background of the events in issue, the sequence of events leading to the decision in issue, a departure from standard procedure (e.g., failure to consider factors normally considered), legislative or administrative history (e.g., minutes of meetings), a past history of discriminatory or segregated conduct, and statistical evidence.37
Direct proof of discriminatory intent is often unavailable. In the absence of such evidence, claims of intentional discrimination under Title IX may be analyzed using the Title VII burden-shifting framework established by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973).38
Applying the McDonnell Douglas principles to a Title IX claim, the investigating agency must first determine whether the case file raises an inference of discrimination, i.e., the investigating agency must establish a prima facie case. The elements of a prima facie case may vary depending on the facts of the complaint, but such elements often include the following:
In contrast to disparate treatment, which focuses on the intent to cause sex-based results, disparate impact focuses on the consequences of a facially sex-neutral policy or practice. Under this theory of discrimination, the core inquiry focuses on the results of the action taken, rather than the underlying intent.46 Because of this difference in focus, evidence of a discriminatory intent or purpose is not required. Indeed, "intent" is not an element in the disparate impact analysis.
Under the disparate impact theory, a recipient violates agency regulations by using a neutral procedure or practice that has a disparate impact on protected individuals, and such practice lacks a substantial legitimate justification. As in Title VI disparate impact cases, the elements of a Title IX disparate impact claim derive from the analysis of cases decided under Title VII disparate impact law. 49
In a disparate impact case, the focus of the investigation concerns the consequences of the recipient's practices, rather than the recipient's intent.50 To establish discrimination under a disparate impact scheme, the investigating agency must first ascertain whether the recipient utilized a facially neutral practice that had a disproportionate impact on the basis of sex.51 In doing so, the investigating agency must do more than demonstrate that the practice or policy in question is a "bad idea."52 The agency must show a causal connection between the facially neutral policy and the disproportionate and adverse impact on a protected group.53
If the evidence establishes a prima facie case, the investigating agency must then determine whether the recipient can articulate a "substantial legitimate justification" for the challenged practice.54 "Substantial legitimate justification" is similar to the Title VII concept of "business necessity," which involves showing that the policy or practice in question is related to performance on the job.55
If the recipient can make such a showing, the inquiry then turns to whether there are any "equally effective alternative practices" that would result in less adverse impact.58 Evidence of either will support a finding of liability.
In evaluating a potential disparate impact violation, it is important to examine whether there is a substantial legitimate justification for the challenged practice and whether there exists an alternative practice that is comparably effective with less of a disparate impact.62
[B]ut the district court did not consider, much less analyze, whether the defendants had shown a substantial legitimate justification for this allocation. The MTA and the State identified several factors favoring a higher subsidization of the commuter lines. By encouraging suburban residents not to drive into the City, subsidization of the commuter rails minimizes congestion and pollution levels associated with greater use of automobiles in the city; encourages business to locate in the City; and provides additional fare-paying passengers to the City subway and bus system. In these respects and in others, subsidizing the commuter rails may bring material benefits to the minority riders of the subway and bus system. The district court dismissed such factors, concluding that the MTA board did not explicitly consider them before voting on the NYCTA and commuter line fare increases. That finding is largely irrelevant to whether such considerations would justify the relative allocation of total funds to the NYCTA and the commuter lines (emphasis added).
Similarly, in Young by and through Young v. Montgomery County (Ala) Bd. of Educ.,64 the court ruled that even if a disparate impact were assumed, the defendants had established a "substantial legitimate justification."
The Title IX regulations incorporate the requirement in the Title VI regulations, which provides that "[n]o recipient or other person shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any individual for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege secured by [Title VI], or because he has made a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding or hearing under this subpart."68
Retaliation protections are designed to preserve the integrity and effectiveness of the enforcement process itself. Because of this purpose, the merits of any underlying complaint of sex discrimination are irrelevant in assessing a retaliation complaint.69 The prohibited conduct is the act of retaliation itself.
Moreover, protected activities include more than filing complaints seeking a vindication of personal rights.70 The Department believes that a narrow reading requiring the prior exercise of personal rights is inconsistent with the broad remedial purposes behind Title IX itself.71 It is important to re-emphasize that Title VI agency anti-retaliation regulations (incorporated into Title IX regulations) provide "[n]o recipient or other person shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any individual for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege secured by [Title VI], . . ." Thus, anyone who asserts rights secured by Title IX is protected. Retaliation claims have their own remedial purpose in that they seek to ensure that rights created under a federal civil rights statute do not go unenforced for fear of adverse official reaction.72 This goal is undercut if recipients are allowed to retaliate against persons subject to their authority who publicly object to discrimination against others.
Consistent with this construction, most federal agencies have joined in adopting final regulations implementing Title IX which broadly prohibit "discrimination in employment, or recruitment, consideration, or selection therefor, whether full-time or part-time, under any education program or activity operated by a recipient that receives Federal financial assistance."76
In resolving employment actions, the courts have generally held that the substantive standards and policies developed under Title VII to define discriminatory employment conduct apply with equal force to employment actions brought under Title IX.
. . .[W]hen a plaintiff complains of discrimination with regard to conditions of employment in an institution of higher learning, the method of evaluating Title IX gender discrimination claims is the same as those in a Title VII case.77
The use of case law and policies developed under Title VII is similarly appropriate in the administrative setting. In conducting investigations alleging employment discrimination, agencies shall consider Title VII case law and EEOC Guidelines, 29 CFR parts 1604-1607, unless inapplicable, in determining whether a recipient of Federal financial assistance has engaged in an unlawful employment practice.78
As noted above, the Title IX common rule specifically incorporates the disparate impact standard as part of its prohibitions against sex-based employment discrimination.83 In addition, the Title IX common rule applies its prohibition against sex-based discrimination to the full range of activities related to the recruitment, evaluation, classification, payment, assignment, retention or treatment of employees.84 The Title IX common rule addresses various areas including the treatment of pregnancy as a temporary disability, pre-employment inquiries regarding marital or parental status, imposition of employment criteria or testing devices having a disproportionate impact, recruitment, and compensation and benefits (including equal pension contributions and benefits).
Where the Title IX common rule does not address some aspect of the employment relationship or where more detailed guidance is required beyond that provided by the Title IX common rule (and if there is no relevant guidance issued by the Department of Education interpreting its Title IX regulations), agency officials should review and apply the applicable standards and policies developed under Title VII.
Two areas raise special considerations requiring specific discussion. In some cases, recipients may attempt to modify their obligations under Title IX in an effort to comply with other legal or contractual obligations. In other cases, recipients may attempt to create sex-sensitive criteria for employment in specific types of positions.
(a) Prohibitory requirements. The obligation to comply with ï½§ï½§___.500 through ___.550 is not obviated or alleviated by the existence of any State or local law or other requirement that imposes prohibitions or limits upon employment of members of one sex that are not imposed upon members of the other sex.
Thus, in cases of conflict between the requirements of Title IX and obligations imposed by local law or third party contracts, Title IX controls. If an entity does not want to follow Title IX, it is free to simply decline federal financial assistance but it still may be subject to Title VII.
In evaluating claims that sex-based job qualifications are justified as a BFOQ, agency investigative officials should consult and apply the standards and case law developed under Title VII with respect to this narrow exception.
Complaints received by federal agencies that allege sex-based employment discrimination should be processed in conformity with the "Procedures for Complaints of Employment Discrimination Filed Against Recipients of Federal Financial Assistance."86 These Joint Complaint Procedures, promulgated jointly by the Department of Justice and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in 1983, are intended to "reduce duplicative efforts by different Federal agencies . . . reduce the burden on employers [and] allow . . . agencies to focus their resources on allegations of services discrimination."87 As discussed below, these procedures require referral of employment complaints to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in some circumstances.
Under the Joint Complaint Procedures, complaints are deemed filed with the EEOC as of the date the complaint was received by the sister federal agency. Moreover, the Joint Complaint Procedures require that the recipient be advised of receipt of the employment complaint within 10 days.88 Within 30 days of receipt, the receiving agency is to determine its jurisdiction over the complaint and the procedure under which it will be handled.89
In those cases where the agency does not have jurisdiction over the employment complaint (i.e., the alleged discriminating entity does not receive federal financial assistance or it receives federal financial assistance but does not have an educational component), the agency is to transfer the complaint to the EEOC and advise both the complainant and the recipient of the specific office of the EEOC to which the complaint is being transferred.
Aid or perpetuate discrimination against any person by providing significant assistance to any agency, organization, or person that discriminates on the basis of sex in providing any aid, benefit, or service to students or employees;
Under the Title IX common rule, recipients of federal financial assistance must not discriminate in providing facilities on the basis of sex. A recipient may provide separate toilet, locker room, and shower facilities on the basis of sex. However, such facilities provided to one sex must be comparable to the facilities provided to the other sex. 65 Fed. Reg. at 52871.
A recipient generally may not provide an education program or activity separately on the basis of sex or require or refuse participation by an individual of a certain sex in courses such as health, physical education, industrial, business, vocational, technical, home economics, music, and adult education courses on the basis of sex.91 65 Fed. Reg. 52871. However, in a prison setting, penal necessities may require educational programs and activities to be offered separately on the basis of sex. While separate courses may be offered in a prison setting, penal necessity is not a defense for failing to provide equality of access to comparable educational programs to male and female inmates.
Under the Title IX common rule, a recipient may not discriminate against any person on the basis of sex in the counseling or guidance of students or applicants for admission. Specifically, in appraising or counseling students, a recipient must not use different testing or other materials on the basis of sex or use materials that permit or require different treatment of students on the basis of sex. Such different materials may be used, however, where they cover the same occupational interest areas and their use is shown to be essential to eliminate sex bias. Finally, where a recipient finds that a particular class contains a substantially disproportionate number of individuals of one sex, the recipient must take such action as is necessary to assure itself that such disproportion is not the result of discrimination on the basis of sex in counseling or appraisal materials or by counselors. 65 Fed. Reg. at 52871.
Although recipients are allowed to administer or assist in administering specific sex-restricted scholarships, fellowships, or other forms of financial assistance to students through a domestic or foreign will, trust, bequest, or similar instrument, the Title IX regulations require that the overall effect of such sex-restricted financial assistance not discriminate on the basis of sex. 65 Fed. Reg. 52872 at ï½§___.430(b). To ensure compliance with Title IX regulations, recipients must develop and use procedures that select students to be awarded financial assistance in a nondiscriminatory manner and not on the basis of availability of funds restricted to members of a particular sex. 65 Fed. Reg. 52872 at ï½§ .430(b)(2)(i). This means that a recipient cannot deny a scholarship or other financial assistance to an individual because the available monies are restricted to members of a particular sex. For example, recipients must select in a sex neutral fashion who is eligible for assistance. They are than free to allocate assistance to those selected individuals from among sex restricted scholarships. However, they cannot deny assistance to selected individuals because scholarships or other financial assistance is sex restricted.92
A recipient who assists any agency, organization, or person in making employment available to its students must ensure that the employment is not provided in a discriminatory manner on the basis of sex. If the agency, organization, or person is offering employment in a discriminatory manner, the recipient must not assist such an agency, organization, or person by providing its employment service. 65 Fed. Reg. 52872 at ï½§ ___.435(a)(1),(2).
Under the Title IX common rule, a recipient must not discriminate on the basis of sex in providing health and insurance benefits or services. Specifically, the provision of such benefits and services to students must meet the same requirements as outlined in the employee provisions of the common rule. 65 Fed. Reg. at 52873-52874. However, these provisions do not prohibit a recipient from providing any benefit or service that may be used by a different proportion of students of one sex than of the other, including family planning services. However, any recipient that provides full coverage health service must provide gynecological care. 65 Fed. Reg. at 52872.
No person shall on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, be treated differently from another person, or otherwise be discriminated against in any interscholastic, intercollegiate, club or intramural athletics offered by a recipient, and no recipient shall provide such athletics separately on such basis.
a recipient may operate or sponsor separate teams for members of each sex where selection for such teams is based upon competitive skill or the activity involved is a contact sport. However, where a recipient operates or sponsors no such team for members of the other sex, and athletic opportunities for members of that sex have previously been limited, members of the excluded sex must be allowed to try out for the team offered unless the sport involved is a contact sport. For the purposes of these Title IX regulations, contact sports include boxing, wrestling, rugby, ice hockey, football, basketball, and other sports the purpose or major activity of which involves bodily contact.
The regulations go on to provide that a recipient that operates or sponsors interscholastic, intercollegiate, club, or intramural athletics shall provide equal opportunity for members of both sexes. A number of factors are set forth to determine equality of opportunity including but not limited to the provision of equipment, scheduling of games and practice time, travel and per diem allowances, assignment and compensation of coaches, provision of locker rooms, provision of medical and training facilities, provision of housing and dining facilities and publicity. See 65 Fed. Reg. 52873 - 52874 at ï½§ ___.450(c).
The regulations give a recipient that operates or sponsors interscholastic, intercollegiate, club, or intramural athletics at the elementary, secondary, and postsecondary school levels an adjustment period to come into compliance with these requirements. No such adjustment period is set forth for other recipients. See 65 Fed. Reg. 52873 at ï½§ ___.450(d).
Title IX protects students from sexual harassment in educational programs or activities operated by recipients of federal funding. The protection against sexual harassment derives from the general prohibitions against sex discrimination contained in the Title IX common rule at _.400. Those provisions state in relevant part:
(a)General. Except as provided elsewhere in these Title IX regulations, no person shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be subjected to discrimination under any . . . education program or activity operated by a recipient that receives Federal financial assistance.
(6) Aid of perpetuate discrimination against any person by providing significant assistance to any agency, organization, or person that discriminates on the basis of sex in providing any aid, benefit or service to students or employees:
(a) Remedial action. If the designated agency official finds that a recipient has discriminated against persons on the basis of sex in an education program or activity, such recipient shall take such remedial action as the designated agency official deems necessary to overcome the effects of such discrimination.
Title IX prohibits sexual harassment by teachers or other employees of the federally funded entity administering an education program or activity. Gebser v. Lago Vista Indep. Sch. Dist., 524 U.S. 274 (1998)(school liable for money damages in private litigation under Title IX for teacher/student sex harassment if school had actual knowledge of the misconduct and was deliberately indifferent); Franklin v. Gwinnett County Pub. Sch., 503 U.S. 60 (1992)(coach/teacher sexual harassment of high school student actionable under Title IX).
While it is clear that discrimination in violation of Title IX must be "on the basis of sex," courts have held that subjecting an individual to sex stereotyping may constitute sex discrimination in appropriate circumstances. In Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, 490 U.S. 228, 250 (1989), a Title VII case, the plaintiff was denied partnership in an accounting firm, due, in part, to the attitudes of the senior partners who described her as "macho" and advised her to wear makeup and jewelry and to dress in more feminine clothing. Id. at 235. The Supreme Court explained:
In the specific context of sex stereotyping, an employer who acts on the basis of a belief that a woman cannot be aggressive, or that she must not be, has acted on the basis of gender... As for the legal relevance of sex stereotyping, we are beyond the day when an employer could evaluate employees by assuming or insisting that they match the stereotype associated with their group, for in forbidding employers to discriminate against individuals because of their sex, Congress intended to strike at the spectrum of disparate treatment of men and women result from sex stereotypes.
Several circuit courts have also addressed gender-based harassment on the basis of stereotyping. Higgins v. New Balance Athletic Shoe, Inc., 194 F. 3d 252 (1st Cir. 1999)(Title VII); Galdieri-Ambrosini v. National Realty & Dev. Corp., 136 F. 3d 276, 289 (2nd Cir. 1998)(Title VII)("Evidence of sexual stereotyping may provide proof that an employment decision or an abusive environment was based on gender.")(citing Price Waterhouse, 490 U.S. at 250-51 (Title VII); Lindahl v. Air France, 930 F. 2d 1434, 1439 (Title VII)(9th Cir. 1991); Sheehan v. Purolator, Inc., 839 F. 2d 99, 106-77 (Title VII)(2nd Cir.)(Kearse, J., dissenting, cert. denied, 488 U.S. 891, 109 S.Ct. 226 (1988)). Since Title VII legal theories are often used by courts to evaluate Title IX claims, sex stereotyping may violate the Title IX prohibition of discrimination on the basis of sex. The fact that the harassment was based on the perception that the individual was not properly "manly" or "feminine" may, in appropriate circumstances, be the basis for a sex stereotyping claim filed under Title IX.
Furthermore, a policy specifically prohibiting sexual harassment and separate grievance procedures for violations of that policy can help ensure that all participants, instructors, employees, third parties, etc. understand the nature of sexual harassment and that the education program provider will not tolerate such conduct. Id.
The procedures outlined in this chapter are based on those provided in the Title IX common rule 65 F.R. 52867 (ï½§ï½§ __.110 - __.140). The procedural requirements discussed in this chapter are also codified in the Department of Education Title IX implementing regulations, 34 C.F.R. ï½§ 106.4 - 106.9. Where the Title IX common rule differs from the Department of Education regulation, we have so noted.93
Generally, the assurance obligates the applicant or recipient to comply with Title IX for the period during which the federal funding is extended. However, with respect to real property provided to operate an education program or activity, the assurance obligates the recipient (or a subsequent transferee) for the period during which the real property is used to provide an education program or activity. Likewise, if the federal funding consists of personal property such as computers, copiers, etc., the assurance remains in effect for the entire time the recipient retains ownership or possession of the property.
It is important to note that the self-evaluation requirement in the Title IX common rule applies only to recipients that are educational institutions (i.e., elementary and secondary schools, high schools, colleges, universities, etc.) that receive federal financial assistance. It does not apply to other educational programs and activities. For example, a prison that receives federal funds from the Department of Justice to administer a vocational training program is not subject to this regulatory requirement.
One of the important aspects of Title IX and its implementing regulations is their requirement that recipients adopt and publish internal grievance procedures to promptly and equitably resolve complaints alleging discrimination on the basis of sex. The responsibility lies with the recipient to establish and maintain a mechanism whereby program participants and employees may seek to redress illegal sex discrimination and whereby the recipient may continually be apprized of and evaluate possible discriminatory policies and procedures and develop strategies to correct discrimination. Although Title IX does not specify a structure for the implementation of a grievance procedure, the U.S. Department of Education has suggested some of the basic components of an effective Title IX grievance procedure in a manual that it has issued on this topic. See Title IX Grievance Procedures: An Introductory Manual, U.S. Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights (1987).
The federal agency providing the financial assistance is primarily responsible for enforcing Title IX as it applies to its recipients. Agencies have several mechanisms available to evaluate whether recipients are in compliance with Title IX, and additional means to enforce or obtain compliance should a recipient's practices be found lacking. Evaluation mechanisms, discussed below, include pre-award reviews, post-award compliance reviews, and investigations of complaints. Because Title IX was patterned after Title VI, the Title IX common rule incorporated by reference the enforcement procedures set forth in the Title VI regulations. 65 Fed. Reg. 52858, 52860 (2000). Accordingly, this section references Title VI cases as well as the Title VI Coordination Regulations and the "Guidelines for the Enforcement of Title VI, Civil Rights Act of 1964," (the "Title VI Guidelines"). See 28 C.F.R. ï½§ï½§ 42.101-42.412 and 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 50.3. The Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights in a January 28, 1999 document entitled: Policy Guidance Document: Enforcement of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Related Statutes in Block Grant-Type Programs97 relied on the Title VI Coordination Regulations for the guidance provided and specifically stated:
This document was drafted specifically with reference to enforcement of Title VI, 42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d, et seq., which prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, and national origin in all Federal programs receiving Federal financial assistance. However, the principles set forth are equally applicable to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, 20 U.S.C. ï½§ 1681, et seq., which prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex in education programs receiving Federal financial assistance; the federally assisted aspects of Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. ï½§ 794, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability in both federally assisted and federally conducted programs; and various fund-granting statutes that contain prohibitions against discrimination.
Agencies should endeavor to ensure that awards of federal financial assistance are only granted to entities that adhere to the substantive nondiscrimination mandates of Title IX and other nondiscrimination laws.
Either at the application stage or the award stage, Federal agencies must ensure that applications for Federal financial assistance contain, be accompanied by, or be covered by a specifically identified assurance from the applicant or recipient, satisfactory to the designated agency official, that each education program or activity operated by the applicant or recipient and to which these Title IX regulations apply will be operated in compliance with these Title IX regulations.
65 Fed. Reg. 52867 ï½§__.115. Regulations requiring applicants to execute an assurance of compliance as a condition for receiving assistance are valid. Grove City College, 465 U.S. at 574-575 (Title IX assurances); Gardner v. Alabama, 385 F.2d 804 (5th Cir. 1967), cert. denied, 389 U.S. 1046 (1968) (Title VI assurances). If an applicant refuses to sign a required assurance, the agency may deny assistance only after providing notice of the noncompliance, an opportunity for a hearing, and other statutory procedures. 42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d-1; 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 50.3 II.A.1. However, the agency need not prove actual discrimination at the administrative hearing, but only that the applicant refused to sign an assurance of compliance with Title IX (or similar nondiscrimination laws). Grove City College, 465 U.S. at 575. Assurances serve two important purposes: they remind prospective recipients of their nondiscrimination obligations, and they provide a basis for the federal government to sue to enforce compliance with these assurances. See United States v. Marion County Sch. Dist., 625 F.2d 607, 609, 612-13 (5th Cir.), reh'g denied, 629 F.2d 1350 (5th Cir. 1980), cert. denied, 451 U.S. 910 (1981).98
This interpretation is a reasonable, and even necessary, application of the statutory remedial scheme. The congressional authorization to obtain relief pre-award would be sharply reduced, if not rendered a near nullity, if agencies could not postpone the assistance decision while spending the time needed to conduct a full and fair investigation and while seeking appropriate relief. Furthermore, the Attorney General's administrative interpretation is entitled to deference. See, e.g., Chevron U.S.A. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 842-45 (1984).100
The Title VI Guidelines recommend that agencies adopt a flexible, case-by-case approach in assessing when deferral is appropriate, and consider the nature of the potential noncompliance problem. Where an assistance application is inadequate on its face, such as when the applicant has failed to provide an assurance or other material required by the agency, "the agency head should defer action on the application pending prompt initiation and completion of [statutory remedial] procedures." 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 50.3 II.A.1 (emphasis added). Where the application is adequate on its face but there are "reasonable grounds" for believing that the applicant is not complying with [Title IX], "the agency head may defer action on the application pending prompt initiation and completion of [statutory remedial] procedures." Id. II.A.2 (emphasis added).101
When action on an assistance application is deferred, remedial efforts "should be conducted without delay and completed as soon as possible." Id. I.A. Agencies should also be cognizant of the time involved in a deferral to ensure that a deferral does not become "tantamount to a final refusal to grant assistance." Id. II.C. The agency should not completely rule out deferrals where time is of the essence in granting the assistance, but should consider special measures that may be taken to seek expedited relief (e.g., by referring the matter to the Department of Justice to file suit for interim injunctive relief).
The Title VI Guidelines provide that the "same [pre-award] rules and procedures would apply" where a federal assistance recipient is granted discretionary authority to dispense the assistance to subrecipients. Id. III:
[T]he Federal Agency should instruct the approving agency -- typically a State agency -- to defer approval or refuse to grant funds, in individual cases in which such action would be taken by the original granting agency itself . . . . Provision should be made for appropriate notice of such action to the Federal agency which retains responsibility for compliance with [Title IX compliance] procedures.
Thus, the Title VI Guidelines support federal agencies requiring that recipients/subgrantors obtain assurances of compliance from subrecipients.102 When the recipient receives information pre-award that indicates noncompliance by an applicant for a subgrant, recipients may defer making the grant decision, may seek a voluntary resolution and, if no settlement is reached, (after complying with statutory procedural requirements), may refuse to award assistance.
Section 42.406(d) of the Title VI Coordination Regulations lists the types of data that should be submitted to and reviewed by federal agencies prior to granting funds. In addition to submitting an assurance that it will compile and maintain records as required, an applicant should provide: (1) notice of all lawsuits (and, for recipients, complaints) filed against it; (2) a description of assistance applications that it has pending in other agencies and of other federal assistance being provided; (3) a description of any civil rights compliance reviews of the applicant during the preceding two years; and (4) a statement as to whether the applicant has been found in noncompliance with any relevant civil rights requirements. Id.
It is recommended that agencies implement an internal screening process whereby agency officials are notified of potential assistance grants and are provided the opportunity to raise a "red flag" or concern about the potential grant recipient.104 If limited resources are a problem, agencies should develop a system to target a significant proportion of assistance applications.105
As part of the Department of Justice's oversight and coordinating function, each agency should submit to the Department, as part of its annual implementation plan, any targeting procedures that are adopted.
Federal agencies are required to maintain an effective program of post-award compliance reviews.107 Federal agency Title VI regulations, which are incorporated into Title IX regulations,108 reiterate this requirement.109 Compliance reviews can be large and complex, or more limited in scope.
Federal agencies have broad discretion in determining which recipients and subrecipients to target for compliance reviews. However, this discretion is not unfettered. In United States v. Harris Methodist Fort Worth, 970 F.2d 94 (5th Cir. 1992), the Fifth Circuit found that a Title VI compliance review involves an administrative search and, therefore, Fourth Amendment requirements for "reasonableness" of a search are applicable. The Court considered three factors: (1) whether the proposed search is authorized by statute; (2) whether the proposed search is properly limited in scope; and (3) how the administrative agency designated the target of the search. Id. at 101; United States v. New Orleans Pub. Serv. (NOPSI III), 723 F.2d 422 (5th Cir.) rehearing en banc denied, 734 F.2d 226 (5th Cir. 1984) (E.O. 11246 compliance review unreasonable) (citing United States v. Mississippi Power & Light Co., 638 F.2d 899 (5th Cir. 1981)); and First Alabama Bank of Montgomery, N.A., v. Donovan, 692 F.2d 714, 721 (11th Cir. 1982) (Exec. Order No. 11246 compliance review reasonable); But see Marshall v. Barlow's Inc., 436 U.S. 307 (1978).110
The Harris Court suggested that selection of a target for a compliance review will be reasonable if it is based either on (1) specific evidence of an existing violation, (2) a showing that "reasonable legislative or administrative standards for conducting an . . . inspection are satisfied with respect to a particular [establishment]," or (3) a showing that the search is "pursuant to an administrative plan containing specific neutral criteria." Harris Methodist, 970 F.2d at 101 (internal citations omitted); NOPSI III, 723 F.2d at 425.
Thus, agencies are cautioned that they should not select targets randomly for compliance reviews but, rather, they should base their decisions on neutral criteria or evidence of a violation. A credible complaint can serve as specific evidence suggesting a violation that could trigger a compliance review.
Apart from complying with the standards outlined above, it is recommended that a decision to conduct a compliance review be set forth in writing and approved by senior civil rights management. An agency may be required to show that it has selected its targets for compliance reviews in an objective, reasonable manner. A contemporaneous, written record that reflects the factors considered will aid in refuting allegations of bias or improper targeting of a recipient. See NOPSI III, 723 F.2d at 428. The written record should identify any regulations or internal guidance that set forth criteria for selection of targets for compliance reviews, and explain how such criteria are met.
Agency Title VI regulations (incorporated into Title IX regulations) are silent as to procedures for conducting compliance reviews, although, as discussed, the Title VI Coordination Regulations provide general guidance as to the types of information to solicit. Federal agencies granting federal financial assistance are required to "establish and maintain an effective program of post-approval compliance reviews" of recipients to ensure that the recipients are complying with the requirements of Title VI. 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.407(a). Related to the reviews themselves, recipients should be required to submit periodic compliance reports to the agencies and, where appropriate, conduct field reviews of a representative number of major recipients. Finally, the Title VI Coordination Regulations recommend that agencies consider incorporating a Title VI component into general program reviews and audits. 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.407(c)(1).112 These Title VI requirements are applicable to Title IX as well.
Results of post-approval reviews by the federal agencies should be in writing and include specific findings of fact and recommendations. The determination by the federal agency of the recipient's compliance status shall be made as promptly as possible. 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.407(c).
The Title VI Coordination Regulations require that federal agencies establish procedures for the "prompt processing and disposition" of complaints of discrimination in federally funded programs. 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.408(a). Agency regulations with respect to procedures for the investigation of complaints of discriminatory practices, however, are typically brief, and lack details as to the manner or time table for such inquiry. See, e.g., 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.107; 32 C.F.R. ï½§ 195.8. Generally, by regulation, an agency will allow complainants 180 days to file a complaint, although the agency may exercise its discretion and accept a complaint filed later in time. See, e.g., 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.107(b). An agency is not obliged to investigate a complaint that is frivolous, has no apparent merit, or where other good cause is present, such as a pending law suit. An investigation customarily will include interviews of the complainant, the recipient's staff, and other witnesses; a review of the recipient's pertinent records, and consideration of the evidence gathered and defenses asserted. If the agency finds no violation after an investigation, it must notify, in writing, the recipient and the complainant, of this decision. See, e.g., 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.107(d)(2). If the agency believes there is adequate evidence to support a finding of noncompliance, the first course of action for the agency is to seek voluntary compliance by the recipient. See, e.g., 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.107(d)(1). If the agency concludes that the matter cannot be resolved through voluntary negotiations, the agency must make a formal finding of noncompliance and seek enforcement, either through judicial action or administrative fund suspension.
Where an agency receives a complaint about a recipient that is funded by more than one federal agency, the funding agency may avoid duplicative compliance and enforcement procedures by sharing or delegating compliance information and enforcement responsibilities. Section 1-207 of Executive Order 12250 authorizes the Attorney General to initiate cooperative programs and agreements between federal agencies to promote the effective enforcement of, inter alia, Title VI and IX. See also, 28 C.F.R. ï½§ï½§ 42.401-415.
Many agencies that fund entities that operate educational programs or activities have Title VI delegation agreements with the Department of Education (ED). However, only two of these agencies, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Environmental Protection Agency, have Title IX delegation agreements with ED. Delegation Agreements help to avoid duplicative enforcement efforts since they give to lead agencies responsibilities for conducting investigations when more than one agency has jurisdiction over a case. The Federal Coordination and Compliance Section of the Civil Rights Division is currently developing a comprehensive Title IX and Title VI interagency Delegation Agreement to include the remaining federal agencies that do not have Title IX delegation agreements.
Finally, the Title VI Coordination Regulations require that each federal agency, (and recipients that process Title VI complaints), maintain a log of complaints received. 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.408(d). The log shall include the following: the sex of the complainant, the identity of the recipient, the nature of the complaint, the date the complaint was filed, the investigation completed, the date and nature of the disposition, and other pertinent information.
Agency staff should remember that the primary means of enforcing compliance with Title IX is through voluntary agreements with the recipients, and that fund suspension or termination is a means of last resort.113 This approach is set forth in the statute, is a reflection of congressional intent, and is recognized by the courts. See 42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d-1; Board of Pub. Instruction of Taylor County, Fla. v. Finch, 414 F.2d 1068, 1075 n.11 (5th Cir. 1969) (citing 110 Cong. Rec. 7062 (1964) (Statement of Sen. Pastore)). Accordingly, if an agency believes an applicant is violating Title IX, the agency has three potential remedies:
(3) where voluntary compliance efforts are unsuccessful, referral of the violation to the Department of Justice for judicial action. 42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d-1. In addition, agencies may defer the decision whether to grant the assistance pending completion of a Title IX investigation, negotiations, or other action to obtain remedial relief.114
Compliance with any requirement adopted pursuant to this section may be effected (1) by the termination of or refusal to grant or to continue assistance under such program or activity to any recipient . . . or (2) by any other means authorized by law: Provided, however, that no such action shall be taken until the department or agency concerned . . . has determined that compliance cannot be secured by voluntary means.
42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d-1 (emphasis in original); see Alabama NAACP State Conference of Branches v. Wallace, 269 F. Supp. 346, 351 (M.D. Ala. 1967) (voluntary compliance is to be effectuated if possible). Both the Title VI Coordination Regulations and the Title VI Guidelines urge agencies to seek voluntary compliance before, and throughout, the administrative or judicial process.115 See 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.411(a) ("Effective enforcement of Title VI requires that agencies take prompt action to achieve voluntary compliance in all instances in which noncompliance is found."); 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 50.3 I.C.
Title VI requires that a concerted effort be made to persuade any noncomplying applicant or recipient voluntarily to comply with Title VI. Efforts to secure voluntary compliance should be undertaken at the outset in every noncompliance situation and should be pursued through each stage of enforcement action. Similarly, when an applicant fails to file an adequate assurance or apparently breaches its terms, notice should be promptly given of the nature of the noncompliance problem and of the possible consequences thereof, and an immediate effort made to secure voluntary compliance. Id.
An agency is not required to make formal findings of noncompliance with Title IX before undertaking negotiations or reaching a voluntary agreement to end alleged discriminatory practices. However, there must be a basis for an agency and recipient to enter into such a voluntary agreement (e.g., identification of alleged discriminatory practices, even if the parties do not agree as to the extent of such practices).116 In addition, throughout the negotiation process, agencies should be prepared with sufficient evidence to support administrative or judicial enforcement should voluntary negotiations fail.
An agency must balance its duty to permit informal resolution of findings of noncompliance against its duty to effectuate, without undue delay, the national policy prohibiting continued assistance to programs or activities which discriminate. Efforts to obtain voluntary compliance should continue throughout the process, but should not be allowed to become a device to avoid compliance.117 Once an area of noncompliance is identified, an agency is required to enforce Title IX.
As is done post-award, agencies may obtain compliance "by voluntary means" in the pre-award context by entering into an agreement with the applicant that enjoins the applicant from taking specified actions, requires that specified remedial actions be taken, and/or provides for other appropriate relief. The terms of the agreement become effective once the assistance is granted, and typically are attached as a special condition to the assistance agreement. Three issues arise by exercise of the voluntary compliance authority at the pre-award stage: what is the appropriate scope of special remedial conditions; what is the remedy if an applicant refuses to agree to a special condition proposed by an agency; and what is the remedy if, post-award, the recipient fails to comply with a special remedial condition of the assistance agreement.
When voluntary compliance is sought at the pre-award stage, agencies may exercise heightened flexibility in designing appropriate remedial conditions, for two reasons. First, if the pre-award remedy does not fully resolve the discrimination concern, agencies may have the opportunity to rectify this matter during the life of the assistance grant. Second, since a pre-award investigation and remedial efforts likely would require a deferral of the assistance award, it may be in the interest of the applicant (as well as potentially the agency) that interim measures be agreed to that allow the award to go forward while also addressing the discrimination concern. Thus, a pre-award special condition may grant provisional relief, require that certain aspects of the recipient's program be monitored, and/or require that the recipient provide additional information relating to the discrimination allegations. Of course, the mere fact that relief may be sought post-award does not necessarily mean that full relief, using voluntary means or otherwise, should not be sought pre-award.
Whether an agency may immediately suspend payment based on noncompliance with a previously imposed special remedial condition depends on the terms of the condition. As a general matter, if a recipient violates the terms of a special remedial condition, the noncompliance must be remedied in the same manner that any other post-award noncompliance is addressed -- through voluntary efforts, by the government filing suit, or by the agency suspending or terminating the assistance pursuant to the statutory procedure. If, however, as part of the remedial condition the applicant agrees that the agency immediately may suspend payment if noncompliance occurs, then that contractual provision would likely supersede the statutory protection against instant fund suspension that the recipient otherwise enjoys.
If an agency has evidence at the time of the award which does not rise to the level of an actual violation by an applicant, and thus does not warrant refusal of a grant award, the agency may consider notifying the recipient in the grant award letter that the agency has a civil rights concern. The statement could acknowledge, where appropriate, the applicant's cooperation with an ongoing civil rights investigation or its attempts to resolve the concern.118 By including this language, the applicant is on notice that there may be a potential problem and that the funding arm is aware of what the civil rights arm is doing. It also warns that a failure to cooperate could lead to a denial of funds. The language also may encourage the applicant to enter into voluntary compliance negotiations and engage in alternative dispute resolution, in appropriate cases, to resolve the alleged discrimination at issue without a formal finding or the completion of an investigation. A major advantage of this approach is that it avoids the due process concerns raised when deferral or special conditioning is utilized because, in this case, the funds are being awarded, i.e., there is no "refusal to grant," which would trigger the right to an administrative hearing.
(1) consulting with or seeking assistance from other Federal agencies . . . having authority to enforce nondiscrimination requirements; (2) consulting with or seeking assistance from State or local agencies having such authority; (3) bypassing a recalcitrant central agency applicant in order to obtain assurances from or to grant assistance to complying local agencies; and (4) bypassing all recalcitrant non-Federal agencies and providing assistance directly to the complying ultimate beneficiaries.
The Department of Justice's statutory authority to sue in federal district court on behalf of an agency for violation of Title VI (and, likewise, Title IX) is contained in the phrase "by any other means authorized by law." See 42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d-1; United States v. City and County of Denver, 927 F. Supp. 1396, 1400 (D. Colo. 1996); Ayers v. Allain, 674 F. Supp. 1523, 1551 n.6 (N.D. Miss. 1987); Marion County, 625 F.2d at 612-13 & n.14. In addition, the Department of Justice may pursue judicial enforcement through specific enforcement of assurances, certifications of compliance, covenants attached to property, desegregation or other plans submitted to the agency as conditions of assistance, or violations of other provisions of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, other statutes, or the Constitution. See Marion County, 625 F.2d at 612; 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 50.3 I.B.
Agency regulations interpreting this phrase provide for several options including: 1) referral to the Department of Justice for proceedings, 2) referrals to State agencies, and 3) referrals to local agencies. E.g., 29 C.F.R. ï½§ 31.8(a) (Labor); 34 C.F.R. ï½§ 100.8 (Education); and 45 C.F.R. ï½§ 80.8(a) (HHS):
[C]ompliance may be effected by . . . other means authorized by law. Such other means may include, but are not limited to, (1) a reference to the Department of Justice with a recommendation that appropriate proceedings be brought to enforce any rights of the United States under any law of the United States (including other titles of the Act), or any assurance or contractual undertaking and (2) any applicable proceedings under State or local law.
In order to refer a matter to the Justice Department for litigation, agency regulations require that the funding agency make a finding that a violation exists and a determination that voluntary compliance cannot be achieved. The recipient must be notified of its failure to comply and must be notified of the intended agency action to effectuate compliance.119 Some agency regulations require additional time after this notification to the recipient to continue negotiation efforts to achieve voluntary compliance.120 It should be noted that the funding agency must in fact formally initiate referral of the matter to the Justice Department, because there is no automatic referral mechanism.
4) the head of the agency must file a report with the House and Senate legislative committees having jurisdiction over the programs involved and wait 30 days before terminating funds.121 The report must provide the grounds for the decision to deny or terminate the funds to the recipient or applicant. 42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d-1; 20 U.S.C. ï½§ 1682; See, e.g., 45 C.F.R. ï½§ 80.8(c) (HHS).
As noted above, funds may not be terminated without providing the recipient an opportunity for a formal hearing. See, e.g., 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.109(a). If the recipient waives this right, a decision will be issued by the "responsible Department official" based on the record compiled by the investigative agency. Hearings on terminations cannot be held less than 20 days after receipt of notice of the violation. See, e.g., 45 C.F.R. ï½§ 80.9(a) (HHS).
Agencies have adopted the procedures of the Administrative Procedures Act for administrative hearings. See, e.g., 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.109(d) (Justice); 45 C.F.R. ï½§ 80.9 (HHS). Technical rules of evidence do not apply, although the hearing examiner may exclude evidence that is "irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious." See, e.g., 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.109(d); 45 C.F.R. ï½§ 80.9(d)(2)(HHS). The hearing examiner may issue an initial decision or a recommendation to the "responsible agency official." See, e.g., 28 C.F.R. 42.110. The recipient may file exceptions to any initial decision. In the absence of exceptions or review initiated by the "responsible department official," the hearing examiner's decision will be the final decision. A final decision that suspends or terminates funds, or imposes other sanctions, is subject to review and approval by the agency head. Upon approval, an order shall be issued that identifies the basis for noncompliance, and the action(s) that must be taken in order to come into compliance. A recipient may request restoration of funds upon a showing of compliance with the terms of the order, or if the recipient is otherwise able to show compliance with Title VI or Title IX. See, e.g., 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.110; 45 C.F.R. ï½§ 80.10(g). The restoration of funds is subject to judicial review. 42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d-2; 20 U.S.C. ï½§ 1682. Moreover, as noted above, no funds may be terminated until 30 days after the agency head files a written report on the matter with the House and Senate committees having legislative jurisdiction over the program or activity involved. 42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d-1; 20 U.S.C. ï½§ 1682.
...shall be limited to the particular political entity, or part thereof, or other recipient as to whom such a finding has been made and, shall be limited in its effect to the particular program, or part thereof, in which such noncompliance has been so found, . . . .
42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d-1; 20 U.S.C. ï½§ 1682. This is called the "pinpoint provision." As discussed below, the CRRA did not modify interpretations of this provision, but affected only the interpretation of "program or activity" for purposes of coverage of Title IX (and related statutes). See S. Rep. No. 64 at 20, reprinted in 1988 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 22.
Congress' intent was to limit the adverse effects of fund termination on innocent beneficiaries and to insure against the vindictive or punitive use of the fund termination remedy. Finch, 414 F.2d at 1075.122 "The procedural limitations placed on the exercise of such power were designed to insure that termination would be 'pinpoint(ed) . . . to the situation where discriminatory practices prevail.'" Id.(quoting 1964 U.S.C.C.A.N. 2512).
The seminal case on this issue is Finch, 414 F.2d 1068. A Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW) hearing officer had found that the school district had made inadequate progress toward student and teacher desegregation and that the district had sought to perpetuate the dual school system through its construction program. Based on these findings, a final order was entered terminating "any class of Federal financial assistance" to the district "arising under any Act of Congress" administered by HEW, the National Science Foundation, and the Department of the Interior. Id. at 1071.
On appeal, the Fifth Circuit vacated the termination order, holding that it was in violation of the purpose and statutory scope of the agency's power. The "programs" in issue were three education statutes, yet the HEW officer had not made any specific findings as to whether there was discrimination in all three programs, and/or if action in one program tainted, or caused discriminatory treatment in, other programs. Id. at 1073-74, 79. The court paid considerable attention to the congressional intent of the pinpoint provision: limiting the termination power to "activities which are actually discriminatory or segregated" was designed to protect the innocent beneficiaries of untainted programs. Id. at 1077. The court further held that it was improper to construe Section 602 as placing the burden on recipients to limit the effect of termination orders by proving that certain programs are untainted by discrimination, rather than on an agency to establish the basis for findings as to the scope of discrimination. Id.
As to the meaning of the term "program" in the pinpoint proviso, the court concluded that the legislative history of Title VI evidenced a congressional intent that the term refer not to generic categories of programs by a recipient, but rather to specific programs of assistance, or specific statutes, administered by the federal government. Id. at 1077-78.123 Further, even if "program" was meant to refer to generic categories of aid, the parenthetical phrase, "or part thereof", must be given meaning. Thus, an agency's fund termination order must be based on program-specific (i.e., grant statute specific) findings of noncompliance. The Court reasoned that:
[T]he purpose of the Title VI [fund] cutoff is best effectuated by separate consideration of the use or intended use of federal funds under each grant statute. If the funds provided by the grant are administered in a discriminatory manner, or if they support a program which is infected by a discriminatory environment, then termination of such funds is proper. But there will also be cases from time to time where a particular program, within a state, within a county, within a district, even within a school (in short, within a "political entity or part thereof"), is effectively insulated from otherwise unlawful activities. Congress did not intend that such a program suffer for the sins of others. HEW was denied the right to condemn programs by association. The statute prescribes a policy of disassociation of programs in the fact finding process. Each must be considered on its own merits to determine whether or not it is in compliance with the Act. In this way the Act is shielded from a vindictive application. Schools and programs are not condemned enmasse or in gross, with the good and the bad condemned together, but the termination power reaches only those programs which would utilize federal money for unconstitutional ends.
The specificity required for fund termination was also addressed by the Seventh Circuit in Gautreaux v. Romney, 457 F.2d 124 (7th Cir. 1972). In Gautreaux, the court reversed a district court's order approving federal fund termination for a Housing and Urban Development (HUD) program where there were no findings of discrimination in such program, and where such action was pursued in an effort to pressure action to remedy the defendant's discriminatory conduct in a wholly separate HUD program. Id. at 127-128. The district court had previously found that defendants had violated fair housing laws yet intended to withhold Model Cities Program funds, which primarily support education, job training, and day care programs on behalf of low and moderate income families. Although a small portion of Model Cities money also supported public housing, there was no allegation or finding that any Model Cities program was operated in a discriminatory fashion. Id. at 126-27. Accordingly, the court of appeals held that the district court violated Section 602 of Title VI and the "mandate of" Finch, and abused its discretion in withholding the Model Cities funds. Id. at 128.
It is equally critical to note that, notwithstanding the need for an independent evaluation of each program, an agency (or reviewing court) must examine not only whether the Federal funds are "administered in a discriminatory manner, . . . [but also] if they support a program which is infected by a discriminatory environment." Finch, 414 F.2d 1068, 1078-79 (emphasis added). Not all programs operate in isolation. Thus,
the administrative agency seeking to cut off federal funds must make findings of fact indicating either that a particular program is itself administered in a discriminatory manner, or is so affected by discriminatory practices elsewhere in the [overall operation, e.g., school system] that it thereby becomes discriminatory.
Id. at 1079; see North Haven, 456 U.S. at 539 (approval of HEW Title IX regulations that adopt the Finch "infection" standard.) This latter analysis is often referred to as the "infection theory." Although Finch and Gautreaux were decided prior to passage of the CRRA, it is important to recognize that while the CRRA defined the meaning of "program or activity" for purposes of prohibited conduct, it did not change the definition of such terms for purposes of fund termination for a violation of Title IX. In particular, the CRRA left intact the "pinpoint" provision that limits any fund termination to the "program, or part thereof, in which noncompliance has been so found." 42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d-1.
The most common form of relief sought and obtained through a private right of action is an injunction ordering a recipient to do something. See Cannon, 441 U.S. 667. See also, United States v. Baylor Univ. Med. Ctr., 736 F.2d at 1050, in which the Fifth Circuit held that a court can order termination of federal financial assistance as a remedy. The Supreme Court also has held that individuals may obtain monetary damages for claims of intentional discrimination under Title IX. See Franklin, 503 U.S. at 75 n.8. As discussed below, agencies are encouraged to identify and seek the full complement of relief for complainants and identified victims, where appropriate, as part of voluntary settlements, including, where appropriate, not only the obvious remedy of back pay for certain employment discrimination cases, but also compensatory damages for violations in a nonemployment context. Agencies are also asked to recommend the scope of relief to be sought in referrals of matters to the Department of Justice for judicial enforcement.
Franklin contains a detailed discussion on the merits of allowing monetary damages for intentional violations of Title IX. Id. at 71-76. The Court placed great reliance on the "longstanding rule" that where a federal statute provides (expressly or impliedly) for a right to bring suit, federal courts "presume the availability of all appropriate remedies unless Congress has expressly indicated otherwise." Id. at 66.127 The Court found no congressional intent to abandon this presumption in the enforcement of Title IX.128 Accordingly, the Court concluded that private individuals may obtain damages in appropriate cases.
Throughout its opinion, the Franklin Court broadly referred to the relief being sanctioned as "monetary damages." Although the Court did not define this term, it specifically rejected limiting Title IX plaintiffs to monetary relief that is equitable in nature, such as backpay. See Id. at 75-76.
In Franklin, the Supreme Court was not called upon to rule whether monetary damages are available where other types of discrimination are proven. Nonetheless, the Court noted that unintentional discrimination may present a different legal question, and damages may not be available. Id. at 74.129 Awarding damages may be particularly problematic where the violation rests on a "disparate impact" theory of discrimination. See Guardians, 463 U.S. at 595-603 (Opinions of White, J.).
In incorporating the damages remedy into agency compliance activities, agencies will need to decide when damages should be sought as part of a voluntary compliance agreement and, if damages, are requested, the amount of emphasis to be placed on the damages request in compliance negotiations. Agencies will want to ensure that the damages remedy is implemented in a manner consistent with other enforcement goals and policies, in a manner consistent among compliance agreements, and in a manner that protects the flexibility of the voluntary compliance process. To effectuate these goals, agencies may wish to draft written guidelines, and establish special supervisory procedures and internal reporting requirements.
There are several considerations that may be relevant in deciding how to exercise administrative discretion in applying the damages remedy in particular cases. One factor may be the degree of seriousness of the violation. A second factor may be whether the injury is substantial. A third factor may be whether the injury is pecuniary in nature. Since pecuniary losses represent a concrete injury and are relatively straightforward to measure, they may represent a type of loss for which damages almost always should be sought. Injuries involving "emotional distress" also should be addressed, but may require closer analysis. A fourth factor may be whether the discrimination victim has a current, ongoing relationship with the recipient that involves regular interactions between the two. If such a relationship exists and prospective relief is obtained that benefits the victim, that may weigh against providing compensation for any nonpecuniary injury that is relatively slight.
Another issue is how agencies should respond to requests by recipients that discrimination victims sign a liability release in order to obtain a damages award through a compliance agreement. As a practical matter, agencies likely will need to be open to including such a release in any agreement that provides for damages, if requested by the recipient.
(1) A state shall not be immune under the Eleventh Amendment of the Constitution of the United States from suit in Federal court for a violation of section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 [29 U.S.C.A. ï½§794, title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 [20 U.S.C.A. ï½§1681 et seq.], the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 [42 U.S.C.A. ï½§6101 et seq.], title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 [42 U.S.C.A. ï½§2000d et seq.], or the provisions of any other Federal statute prohibiting discrimination by recipients of Federal financial assistance.
(2) In a suit against a State for a violation of a statute referred to in paragraph (1), remedies (including remedies both at law and in equity) are available for such a violation to the same extent as such remedies are available for such a violation in the suit against any public or private entity other than a State.
The Department of Justice has two roles to play in Title IX enforcement: coordination of federal agency implementation and enforcement, and legal representation of the United States and the funding agency. Pursuant to Exec. Order No. 12250, the Attorney General shall "coordinate the implementation and enforcement by Executive agencies" of Title VI, Title IX, Section 504 and "any other provision of federal statutory law which provides, in whole or in part, that no person in the United States shall, on the ground of race, color, national origin, handicap, religion, or sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subject to discrimination under any program or activity receiving federal financial assistance." Exec. Order No. 12250 ï½§1-201. Except for approval of agency regulations implementing Title IX and Title VI and the issuance of coordinating regulations, all other responsibilities have been delegated to the Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights. While each federal agency extending federal financial assistance has primary responsibility for implementing Title IX with respect to its recipients, overall coordination in identifying legal and operational standards, and ensuring consistent application and enforcement, rests with the Civil Rights Division of the Department of Justice. In interpreting Title IX, the Department will look closely at, and coordinate and consult with, the Department of Education, the agency with the most Title IX experience and the agency with the regulations that served as the basis for the Title IX common rule.
4 In implementing this provision, the Department of Education requires a single-sex school for both sexes once it is provided for one sex. The Department of Education is currently reviewing provisions in its current Title IX regulations regarding single-sex programs to determine whether revised standards or further guidance on this issue may be appropriate.
6 As enacted in Title IX, this provision provides: (b) Nothing contained in subsection (a) of this section shall be interpreted to require any educational institutional to grant preferential or disparate treatment to members of one sex on account of an imbalance which may exist with respect to the total number or percentage of persons of that sex participating in or receiving the benefits of any federally supported program or activity, in comparison with the total number or percentage of persons of that sex in any community, State, section, or other areas: Provided, that this subsection shall not be construed to prevent the consideration in any hearing or proceeding under this title of statistical evidence tending to show that such an imbalance exists with respect to the participation in, or receipt of the benefits of, any such program or activity by the members of one sex. 20 U.S.C. ï½§1681(b).
7 The Javitz Amendment was a compromise bill passed after congress rejected the Tower Amendment, an earlier proposal to either completely exclude intercollegiate athletics from Title IX or to exclude revenue-generating athletic programs. Pub. L. 93- 380, 88 Stat. 612 (1974). The HEW regulations are codified at 34 C.F.R. Part 106.
12 In Delmonte, the plaintiff alleged that he was demoted in 1990 on a prohibited basis in violation of Section 504. 877 F. Supp. at 1564. The court held that the defendant received federal financial assistance through its participation in at least 10 federal training programs (consisting of less than one to three-day programs) both before and after the demotion, over a course of approximately twelve years. Id. at 1565-66. The court does not clearly address whether its conclusion was based on training in the aggregate, or if a single training session (with the required contractual assurances of compliance with nondiscrimination), is sufficient. Id. at 1566.
13 Under the Title IX common rule, each federal agency that awards financial assistance is required to publish in the Federal Register a notice of the programs covered by Title IX. 65 Fed. Reg. 52874 ï½§ .600 (2000) .
14 It is often difficult to separate discussions of closely linked concepts, such as what is a recipient and what is federal financial assistance. Accordingly, the concept of "direct" and "indirect" are discussed both in terms of "direct/indirect recipient" and "directly receive/indirectly receive federal financial assistance."
15 "With the benefit of clear statutory language, powerful evidence of Congress' intent, and a longstanding and coherent administrative construction of the phrase 'receiving federal financial assistance,' we have little trouble concluding that Title IX coverage is not foreclosed because federal funds are granted to Grove City's students rather than directly to one of the College's educational programs." Id. at 569.
Activities wholly carried out by the United States with Federal funds, such as river and harbor improvements or other public works, defense installations, veteran's hospitals, mail service, etc. are not included in the list [of federally assisted programs]. Such activities, being wholly owned by, and operated by or for, the United States, cannot fairly be described as receiving Federal 'assistance.' While they may result in general economic benefit to neighboring communities, such benefit is not considered to be financial assistance to a program or activity within the meaning of Title VI.
17 The court in Bob Jones Univ. distinguished pensions from payments to veterans for educational purposes since the latter is a program with a requirement or condition that the individual participate in a program or activity. 396 F. Supp. at 602 n.16. For a more detailed discussion of when assistance to a beneficiary may constitute indirect assistance to a recipient, see discussion of indirect recipient in section (B)(3) of this Chapter.
20It should be noted that the remaining text of this section distinguishes various scenarios for recipients and beneficiaries. While captions are used to separate different circumstances, courts do not uniformly use the same phrase to explain the same funding pattern. Thus, a court may refer to an "indirect recipient" when the situation more closely fits the paradigm of "primary recipient/subrecipient," as described in Section E of this chapter.
21 While the court's analysis in Grove City of the scope of "program or activity" was reversed by the Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987, Pub. L. No. 100-259, 102 Stat. 28 (1988), the Court's discussion of other principles, including direct and indirect recipients, remains undisturbed.
24The Graves court described the local agency as an "indirect" recipient since the federal money flowed "through another recipient," and compared this situation to Grove City College's indirect receipt of BEOG funds from students. Id. at 433. Given that the funding was distributed to a State agency and a portion allocated to a local entity, the more accurate description is that of primary/subrecipient.
25 It should be remembered that federal assistance may include, not only, the payment of money to an ultimate beneficiary, but also the provision of subsidized services, e.g. job training, elementary and secondary education, prison job skills programs, etc.
26 Title IX broadly defines the term "educational institution" to include "any public or private preschool, elementary, or secondary school, or any institution of vocational, professional, or higher education..." 20 U.S.C. ï½§ 1681.
An education recipient has a different scope of coverage depending upon whether the entity receiving federal funds has education as a primary purpose. If the recipient does have education as its primary purpose, such as colleges, universities, school districts, training institutes, and academies, then the federal funds result in institution-wide coverage. If the entity receiving federal funds does not have education as a primary purpose yet engages in educational functions, then all of its education-related functions are covered. For this entity, its other functions are not necessarily covered unless there is a link between the education function and the non-education functions.
29Gebser v. Lago Vista Indep. Sch. Dist., 524 U.S. 274, 286 (1998); Grove City College v. Bell , 465 U.S. 555, 566 (1984); Cannon v. University of Chicago , 441 U.S. 677, 684-85 (1979); Cohen v. Brown Univ., 101 F.3d 155, 170 (1st Cir. 1996), cert denied, 520 U.S. 1186 (1997); Yusuf v. Vassar College, 35 F.3d 709, 714 (2 nd Cir. 1994). Indeed, one of the earlier legislative proposals of what ultimately became Title IX sought to amend Title VI itself by adding sex as one of its prohibited bases of discrimination. See North Haven , 456 U.S. at 546 (Powell, J., dissenting).
31U.S. Const., Art. I, ï½§8, cl. 1. See Davis v. Monroe County Bd. of Educ., 526 U.S. 629, 640 (1999); Gebser v. Lago Vista Indep. Sch. Dist., 524 U.S. 274, 287 (1998); Smith v. Metropolitan Sch. Dist., Perry Township, 128 F.3d 1014, 1028 (7th Cir. 1997), cert. denied, 524 U.S. 951 (1988).
35Elston v. Talladega County Bd. of Educ., 997 F.2d 1394, 1406 (11 th Cir. 1993), rehearing denied, 7 F.3d 242 (11 th Cir. 1993), cert. denied, 502 U.S. 910 (1991), (quoting Williams v. City of Dothan, 745 F.2d 1406, 1414 (11 th Cir. 1984)).
36 See, e.g., Mississippi Univ. for Women v. Hogan, 458 U.S. 718, 726-730 (1982) (maintenance of single sex nursing school as compensation for assumed prior discrimination rejected as perpetuating sex stereotypes); United States v. Virginia, 518 U.S. 515, 534-46 (1996) (benign justification in defense of a categorical exclusion does not block inquiries into actual purposes of and factual support for the exclusion). It should be noted that both of these cases are Constitutional cases, not Title IX cases.
37 See Village of Arlington Heights v. Metro. Hous. Redevelopment Corp., 429 U.S. 252, 266-68 (1977)(evaluation of intentional discrimination claim under the Fourteenth Amendment); Elston, 997 F.2d at 1406.
46 Disparate impact is also referred to as "disproportionate impact" or "adverse impact." Regardless of the descriptive phrase used, all refer to the process of evaluating facially neutral policies or practices that in fact result in the burdens of a policy or practice being borne more heavily by members of one sex(or race or national origin) than another.
66 Elston, 997 F.2d at 1407; see also Young by and through Young, 922 F.Supp at 551 (goals of addressing illegal recruiting and improving quality of schools were substantial legitimate justifications for policy imposing loss of athletic eligibility after interschool transfer, and plaintiffs failed to demonstrate existence of an equally effective alternative practice).
67 See, e.g., Preston v. Com. Of Va. ex rel. New River Community College, 31 F.3d 203, 205-06 n. 2 (4 th Cir. 1994); Nelson v. University of Maine System, 923 F.Supp 275, 279-80 (D.Me. 1996); Clay v. Board of Trustees of Neosho Community College, 905 F.Supp. 1488, 1495 (D.Kan. 1995).
69 See, e.g., Benson v. Little Rock Hilton Inn, 742 F.2d 414, 416-17 (8 th Cir. 1984) (discussing remedial purpose of retaliation complaints and irrelevance of merits of underlying discrimination claim).
74 This is not to say that the employment practices of a recipient of non-employment related assistance will always be beyond the reach of Title VI. Where such employment discrimination so infects the tone and tenor of a program or activity that it subjects beneficiaries to an oppressive discriminatory atmosphere, enforcement action under Title VI is authorized. See, e.g., 28 C.F.R. ï½§42.104(c)(2) (DOJ Title VI Regulations); 15 C.F.R. ï½§8.4(c)(2) (Commerce Title VI Regulations); 34 C.F.R. ï½§100.3(c)(2) (Education Title VI Regulations). See also, Ahern v. Board of Educ. of the City of Chicago, 133 F.3d 975 (7 th Cir. 1998); United States v. Jefferson County Bd. of Educ., 372 F.2d 836, 883 (5 th Cir. 1966), cert. denied, 389 U.S. 840 (1967).
76 Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Sex in Education Programs or Activities Receiving Federal Financial Assistance (hereinafter referred to as "the Title IX common rule"), 65 Fed. Reg. 52858 (August 30, 2000), ï½§ _.500(a).
77 Johnson v. Baptist Med. Ctr., 97 F.3d 1070, 1072 (8 th Cir. 1996), rehearing denied, 114 F.3d 189 (8 th Cir. 1997). See also Kinman v. Omaha Pub. Sch. Dist., 94 F.3d 463, 469 (8 th Cir. 1996); Brine v. University of Iowa, 90 F.3d 271, 276 (8 th Cir. 1996), cert. denied, 519 U.S. 1149, 117 S.Ct. 1082; Doe v. Oyster River Co-Op Sch. Dist., 992 F.Supp. 467, 474 (D.N.H. 1997) (reference to Title VII provides helpful guidance). But see Chance v. Rice Univ., 984 F.2d 151 (5 th Cir. 1993), rehearing denied, 989 F.2d 179 (5 TH Cir. 1993) (claim of discrimination properly reviewed under the intentional discrimination standard of Title VI rather than the standards under Title VII).
78 29 C.F.R. ï½§1691.4. This provision is part of general regulations adopted jointly by the Department of Justice and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission governing the handling of employment discrimination complaints received by federal funding agencies. Those general regulations are discussed more fully in subsection B.6 of this Chapter.
79 It is important to note, however, that Title VII case law does not apply with equal symmetry in the area of harassment claims. For a discussion of Title IX harassment claims, see section D of this Chapter.
82 See "Procedures for Complaints of Employment Discrimination Filed Against Recipients of Federal financial assistance." 28 C.F.R. ï½§ï½§ 42.601-42.613 (DOJ); 29 C.F.R. ï½§ï½§ 1691.1 - 1691.13 (EEOC).
90 The phrase "special circumstances" is used throughout the Joint Complaint Procedures. In using this phrase, the Joint Complaint Procedures seek to recognize the need for administrative flexibility in processing complaints. For example, an agency might conclude that special circumstances argue in favor of retaining a complaint that ordinarily should be referred to the EEOC where the complaint was related to or in furtherance of a pending investigation of the same recipient.
93 The following agencies also have Title IX regulations with similar requirements: The Department of Agriculture, 7 C.F.R. part 15a; the Department of Energy, 10 C.F.R part 1040; and the Department of Health and Human Services, 45 C.F.R. part 86.
99 The Title VI Guidelines distinguish between the applicability of an agency's deferral authority for initial or one-time awards versus continuing, periodic awards. The Title VI Guidelines state that agencies have deferral authority with regard to "applications for one-time or noncontinuing assistance and initial applications for new or existing programs of continuing assistance." 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 50.3 II.A. In contrast, if an application for funds has been approved and a recipient is entitled to "future, periodic payments," or if "assistance is given without formal application pursuant to statutory direction or authorization," distribution of funds may not be deferred or withheld unless all the Title VI statutory procedures for a termination of funds are followed. Id. II.B.
The Title VI Guidelines do not specify what may constitute "abnormal" or exceptional circumstances to warrant deferral of a continuing grant. In these renewal or continuation situations, the Title VI Guidelines indicate that an assurance of compliance or a nondiscrimination plan may be required prior to continuing the payout of funds.
100 Subsequent to the adoption of Title VI, Congress on at least two occasions has refused to prohibit agencies from exercising pre-award deferral authority. In 1966, in considering the Elementary and Secondary Education Amendments of 1966, the House adopted a provision that effectively would have prohibited pre-award deferrals of certain education grants by the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. The amendment, offered by Representative Fountain, provided that no deferral could occur unless and until there was a formal finding, after opportunity for hearing, that the applicant was violating Title VI. 112 Cong. Rec. 25,573 (1966). Representative Fountain argued that a deferral was the same as a refusal, and accordingly that deferrals should be subject to the same hearing procedure required to refuse or terminate assistance. Id. at 25,573-74. In opposition, Representative Celler argued that the amendment would preclude HEW from obtaining pre-award relief since the award procedure would be completed before the Title VI hearing could be held. Id. at 25,575. During the debate, Rep. Celler noted that HEW was acting pursuant to the directives set out in the Title VI Guidelines. Id. The Senate version did not include any limitation on deferrals. In conference, the prohibition was deleted and replaced with a durational/procedural limitation on certain HEW deferrals. Conf. Rep. No. 2309, 89th Cong., 2d Sess. (1966), reprinted in 1966 U.S.C.C.A.N. 3896. Codified at 42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d-5. Again in 1976, in adopting the Education Amendments of 1976, Congress imposed a durational/procedural limitation on HEW deferral authority, codified at 20 U.S.C. 1232i(b), but rejected a House passed amendment effectively prohibiting specified HEW deferrals. 122 Cong. Rec. 13411-13416; H.R. Conf. Rep. No. 1701, 94th Cong., 1st Sess. 242-43 (1976), reprinted in 1976 U.S.C.C.A.N. 4943-44. This post-adoption legislative history buttresses the conclusion that deferrals are an appropriate application of the pre-award remedial authority granted agencies by Congress. See Board of Pub. Instruction of Palm Beach County, Fla. v. Cohen, 413 F.2d 1201 (5th Cir. 1969).
101 The Title VI Guidelines note that deferral may be more appropriate where it will be difficult during the life of the grant to obtain compliance, e.g., where the application is for noncontinuing assistance. On the other hand, deferral may be less appropriate where full compliance may be achieved during the life of the grant, e.g., where the application is for a program of continuing assistance. Where the grant of assistance is not deferred despite a concern about noncompliance, the Title VI Guidelines advise that
the applicant should be given prompt notice of the asserted noncompliance; funds should be paid out for short periods only, with no long-term commitment of assistance given; and the applicant advised that acceptance of the funds carries an enforceable obligation of nondiscrimination and the risk of invocation of severe sanctions, if noncompliance in fact is found. Id. II.A.2.
106 Post-award reviews may be limited to a "desk audit," i.e., a review of documentation submitted by the recipient, or may involve an on-site review. In either case, an agency will demand the production of or access to records, and this discussion addresses the limits on an agency's demand for such records.
110 As mentioned above, it is assumed that the first two factors can be established. First, that the access provision is an appropriate exercise of agency authority to issue regulations consistent with the statute. Second, it is assumed that any data sought will be relevant to an evaluation of whether the recipient's employment practices or delivery of services are discriminatory.
112 "All Federal staff determinations of Title VI, (as well as Title IX) compliance shall be made by, or be subject to the review of, the agency's civil rights office." 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.407(a). Where regional or area offices of federal agencies have responsibility for approving applications or specific projects, the agency shall "include personnel having Title VI review responsibility on the staffs" of these offices. These personnel will conduct the post-approval compliance reviews. Id.
In this era of downsizing, it is understood that not all field offices will have Title IX staff. This element of review, however, should be conducted and reviewed by experienced Title IX personnel, whether as a full time or collateral duty, and whether or not as members of the office in issue.
115 Agencies are strongly encouraged to make use of alternative dispute resolution (ADR), whenever appropriate. Both the President and the Attorney General have encouraged the use of alternative dispute resolution in matters that are the subject of civil litigation. See Executive Order 12988 and Attorney General Order OBD 1160.1. The Administrative Dispute Resolution Act of 1996 authorizes the use of ADR to resolve administrative disputes. 5 U.S.C. ï½§ 571 et seq.). ADR can consist of anything from the use of a neutral third party or mediator to informally resolving a matter without completing a full investigation.
117 Although Title VI (and, thus, Title IX), do not provide a specific limit to the time period within which voluntary compliance may be sought, it is clear that a request for voluntary compliance, if not followed by responsive action on the part of the institution within a reasonable time, does not relieve the agency of the responsibility to enforce Title IX by one of the two alternative means contemplated by the statute. A consistent failure to do so is a dereliction of duty reviewable in the courts. 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.411(b).
In reviewing an application for funding, we consider whether the applicant is in compliance with federal civil rights laws. A determination of noncompliance could lead to a denial of assistance or an award conditioned on remedial action being taken. We are aware that the Department's Civil Rights Division is conducting an investigation involving possible civil rights violations. The Civil Rights Division has advised us that your agency is cooperating with its investigation, and we have taken that into account in deciding to approve your grant application.
121 The congressional intent behind the 30 day requirement was to include seemingly neutral third parties, (the relevant Congressional committees), to ensure that the decision to terminate funds was fair, reasoned, and not arbitrary. See 110 Cong. Rec. 2498 (1964) (Statement of Cong. Willis); 110 Cong. Rec. 7059 (1964) (Statement of Sen. Pastore).
122 Much of the legislative debate on Title VI centered on the potential scope of any termination of assistance due to a failure to comply with the rules effectuating Section 601. The Dirksen-Mansfield substitute bill, which was developed through informal, bipartisan conferences, sought to answer those concerns. For a listing and explanation of specific changes made by the substitute see, 110 Cong. Rec. 12817-12820 (1964) (Report of Senator Dirksen). Senator Humphrey explained the purpose behind the substitute language.
Some Senators have expressed the fear that in its original form Title VI would authorize cutting off of all federal funds going to a state for a particular program even though only part of the state were guilty of racial discrimination in that program. And some Senators have feared that the title would authorize canceling all federal assistance to a state if it were discriminating in any of the federally-assisted programs in that State.
As was explained a number of times on the floor of the Senate, these interpretations of Title VI are inaccurate. The title is designed to limit any termination of federal assistance to the particular offenders in the particular area where the unlawful discrimination occurs. Since this was our intention, we have made this specific in the provisions of Title VI by adding language to 602 to spell out these limitations more precisely. This language provides that any termination of federal assistance will be restricted to the particular political subdivision which is violating non-discriminatory regulations established under Title VI. It further provides that the termination shall affect only the particular program, or part thereof, in which such a violation is taking place.
Proponents of the bill have continually made it clear that it is the intent of Title VI not to require wholesale cutoffs of Federal [f]unds from all Federal programs in entire States, but instead to require a careful case-by-case application of the principle of nondiscrimination to those particular activities which are actually discriminatory or segregated.
126 In this case, plaintiffs brought suit to enjoin the Department of Education from allowing recipients of its funds to offer certain federally funded scholarships exclusively to minorities. 983 F.2d at 486.
127 The Court further stated, "absent clear direction to the contrary by Congress, the federal courts have the power to award any appropriate relief in a cognizable cause of action brought pursuant to a federal statute." Id. at 70-71.
130 U.S. Const. Amend XI states: "The judicial power of the United States shall not be construed to extend to any suit in law or equity, commenced or prosecuted against one of the United States by Citizens of another State, or by Citizens or subjects of any Foreign State." See Hans v. Louisiana, 134 U.S. 1, 11 (1890).
131 The participating agencies include: the Nuclear Regulatory Commission; Small Business Administration; National Aeronautics and Space Administration; Department of Commerce; Department of Labor; Tennessee Valley Authority; Department of State; Agency for International Development; Department of Housing and Urban Development; Department of Justice; Department of Labor; Department of the Treasury; Department of Defense; National Archives and Records Administration; Department of Veterans Affairs; Environmental Protection Agency; General Services Administration; Department of the Interior; Federal Emergency Management Agency; National Science Foundation; Corporation for National and Community Service; and, the Department of Transportation.
132 See 64 Fed. Reg. 58567 (1999). Three agencies that participated in the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, the National Endowment for the Arts, the National Endowment for the Humanities, and the Institute of Museum and Library Services are promulgating separate Title IX regulations, rather than participate in the final Title IX common rule.
Since the attached Title IX Legal Manual was issued in 2001, sex discrimination jurisprudence has developed significantly.  Notably, on June 15, 2020, the Supreme Court held in Bostock v. Clayton County that sex discrimination under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. (Title VII) encompasses discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and transgender status.  140 S. Ct. 1731, 1741, 590 U.S. ___, ___ (2020).
Though Title VII and Title IX are two distinct statutes, their statutory prohibitions against sex discrimination are similar, such that Title VII jurisprudence is frequently used as a guide to inform Title IX.  See Manual, Chapters I, IV.  Indeed, in the months following the Bostock decision, several federal courts have reached the same conclusion as to Title IX, holding that Title IX protects transgender students from discrimination on the basis of gender identity.  See, e.g., Grimm v. Gloucester Cty. Sch. Bd., 972 F.3d 586, 616-17 (4th Cir. 2020) (“Although Bostock interprets [Title VII], it guides our evaluation of claims under Title IX.”), as amended (Aug. 28, 2020), reh’g en banc denied, 976 F. 3d 399 (4th Cir. 2020), cert. denied, No. 20-1163 (June 28, 2021); B.P.J. v. W. Virginia State Bd. of Educ., No. 2:21-CV-00316, 2021 WL 3081883, at *7 (S.D.W. Va. July 21, 2021); Koenke v. Saint Joseph's Univ., No. CV 19-4731, 2021 WL 75778, at *2 (E.D. Pa. Jan. 8, 2021); Doe v. Univ. of Scranton, No. 3:19-CV-01486, 2020 WL 5993766, at *11 n.61 (M.D. Pa. Oct. 9, 2020).  Other circuits reached this conclusion before Bostock, relying on their own Title VII jurisprudence.  See Whitaker By Whitaker v. Kenosha Unified Sch. Dist. No. 1 Bd. of Educ., 858 F.3d 1034, 1049-50 (7th Cir. 2017) (transgender boy was likely to succeed on his claim that school district violated Title IX by excluding him from the boys’ restroom); Dodds v. U.S. Dep’t of Educ., 845 F.3d 217, 221-22 (6th Cir. 2016) (per curiam) (school district that sought to exclude transgender girl from girls’ restroom was not likely to succeed on the claim because Title IX prohibits discrimination based on sex stereotyping and gender nonconformity).
On March 26, 2021, the Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General for the Civil Rights Division issued a memorandum to federal civil rights offices and general counsels addressing the application of Bostock to Title IX, determining that Title IX’s prohibition on discrimination “on the basis of sex” includes discrimination on the basis of gender identity and sexual orientation.  See Letter from Pamela S. Karlan, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General for the Civil Rights Division, to Federal Civil Rights Directors and General Counsels (Mar. 26, 2021), https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/correspondence/stakeholders/educator-202106-tix.pdf.
The reasoning in these interpretations applies with equal force to discrimination against intersex people.  “Intersex” refers to people born with variations in physical sex characteristics—including genitals, gonads, chromosomes, and hormonal factors—that do not fit typical definitions of male or female bodies.  The Bostock Court addressed discrimination against “persons with one sex identified at birth and another today.”  140 S. Ct. at 1747.  Discrimination against intersex individuals is similarly motivated by perceived differences between an individual’s specific sex characteristics and their sex category (either as identified at birth or some subsequent time).  Additionally, discrimination based on anatomical or physiological sex characteristics (such as genitals, gonads, chromosomes, and hormone function) is inherently sex-based.  Intersex traits, like gender identity and sexual orientation, are “inextricably bound up with” sex.  See id. at 1742.  In other words, it is impossible to discuss intersex status without also referring to sex.  Cf. Grimm, 972 F.3d at 609.  Lastly, discrimination based on intersex traits may also involve sex stereotypes, as intersex people by definition have traits that do not conform to stereotypes about male or female bodies.  Cf. Whitaker, 858 F.3d at 1048 (“[A] transgender individual does not conform to the sex-based stereotypes of the sex that [they were] assigned at birth.”)
While this Manual is not intended to provide a complete, comprehensive directory of all cases or issues related to Title IX, these important developments are highlighted here to clarify the Department’s position that Title IX’s prohibition on sex discrimination includes discrimination based on gender identity, intersex traits, and sexual orientation.
It is intended that this manual will be updated periodically to reflect significant changes in the law. Comments on this publication, and suggestions as to future updates, including published and unpublished cases, may be addressed to:
This Manual is intended only to provide guidance on general principles related to Title IX enforcement outside the context of traditional educational institutions. It is not intended to, does not, and may not be relied upon to create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by any party against the United States.
In June 1972, President Nixon signed Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 into law. Title IX is a comprehensive federal law that has removed many barriers that once prevented people, on the basis of sex, from participating in educational opportunities and careers of their choice. It states that:
No person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation, in be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.
20 U.S.C. ï½§ 1681, et seq. Title IX applies to all aspects of education programs or activities operated by recipients of federal financial assistance.1 In addition to educational institutions such as colleges, universities, and elementary and secondary schools, Title IX also applies to any education or training program operated by a recipient of federal financial assistance. For example, Title IX would cover such diverse activities as a forestry workshop run by a state park receiving funds from the Department of Interior; a boater education program sponsored by a county parks and recreation department receiving funding from the Coast Guard; a local course concerning how to start a small business, sponsored by the state department of labor that receives funding from the Small Business Administration; state and local courses funded by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in planning how to deal with disasters; and vocational training for inmates in prisons receiving assistance from the Department of Justice (hereinafter referred to as "DOJ" or "Justice Department" or "the Department"). Generally, it covers all aspects of the education program, including admissions, treatment of participants, and employment. Title IX guarantees equal educational opportunity in federally funded programs.
The two statutes both condition an offer of federal funding on a promise by the recipient not to discriminate, in what is essentially a contract between the government and the recipient of funds. Because of this close connection between the statutes, Title VI legal precedent provides some important guidance for the application of Title IX. See, e.g., Cannon v. University of Chicago, 441 U.S. 677, 694-98 (1979)(Congress intended that Title IX would be interpreted and applied as Title VI has been). Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability in federally funded programs, was also modeled after Title VI and, hence, may also provide guidance for an analysis of Title IX. See Alexander v. Choate, 469 U.S. 287, 294 (1985)(Because Title IX, Section 504, and Title VI contain parallel language, the same analytic framework should generally apply in cases under all three statutes). These statutes were enacted to prevent unlawful discrimination and to provide remedies for the effects of past discrimination.
Additional Title IX exemptions include the membership policies of certain university-based social fraternities and sororities, the Girl and Boy Scouts, the YMCA and YWCA, the Camp Fire Girls and certain other voluntary single-sex and tax-exempt youth service organizations whose members are chiefly under age 19.
In addition to the statutory exemptions discussed above, the Title IX common rule contains a few other exceptions permitting single-sex programs under certain limited circumstances. For example, section ___.110(a)requires appropriate remedial action if a designated agency official finds that a recipient has discriminated against persons on the basis of sex. In the absence of a finding of discrimination, section ___.110(b) permits affirmative action consistent with law to overcome the effects of conditions that resulted in limited participation in a program by persons of a particular sex. Either of these provisions could permit single-sex programs under appropriate circumstances. In addition, several other regulatory provisions permit single-sex programs: section ___.415(b)(5) permits portions of education programs or activities that deal exclusively with human sexuality to be conducted in separate sessions for boys and girls; section ___.445(b) permits a program offered to pregnant students on a voluntary basis that is comparable to that offered to non-pregnant students; sections ___.414(b)(2) and (6) permit recipients to make requirements based on objective standards of physical ability or of vocal range or quality; and section __ .415(b)(3) permits separation by sex in physical education classes involving contact sports. In addition, section 420(b) permits exclusion, on the basis of sex, of any person from admission to a nonvocational school operated by a local education agency, so long as "...such recipient otherwise makes available to such person, pursuant to the same policies and criteria of admission, courses, services, and facilities comparable to each course, service, and facility offered in or through such schools." 4
The Title IX regulations contain a variety of procedural requirements, the most important of which is the requirement to establish grievance procedures. The regulations require that every recipient to which Title IX applies "adopt and publish grievance procedures providing for prompt and equitable resolution of student and employee complaints alleging any action that be prohibited by these Title IX regulations." ï½§ ___.135. These grievance procedures are an essential element in ensuring that Title IX and its implementing regulations are complied with in the least contentious manner possible.5
Congress enacted Title IX with two principal objectives in mind: to avoid the use of federal resources to support discriminatory practices in education programs, and to provide individual citizens effective protection against those practices.See Cannon v. University of Chicago, 441 U.S. 677, 704 (1979).
A year later, Title IX began its congressional life in earnest when an amendment was introduced in the Senate by Senator Birch Bayh of Indiana, who explained that its purpose was to combat "the continuation of corrosive and unjustified discrimination against women in the American educational system." 118 Cong. Rec. 5803 (1972). During debate, Senator Bayh stressed the fact that economic inequities suffered by women can often be traced to educational inequities. In support of the amendment, Senator Bayh pointed to the link between discrimination in education and subsequent employment opportunities:
The field of education is just one of many areas where differential treatment [between men and women] has been documented but because education provides access to jobs and financial security, discrimination here is doubly destructive for women. Therefore, a strong and comprehensive measure is needed to provide women with solid legal protection from the persistent, pernicious discrimination which is serving to perpetuate second-class citizenship for American women.
Congressional activity on the issue increased with the introduction of various proposals in the House and Senate to end sex discrimination in education. Although there was growing consensus that sex discrimination in education should end, there was little agreement as to the best methods for reaching that goal. Some critics claimed that the legislation was intended to try to maintain a certain quota or ratio of male to female students. Senator Bayh reiterated many times during the debate that "the amendment is not designed to require specific quotas. The thrust of the amendment is to do away with every quota." 117 Cong. Rec. 30,409 (1971). The Senator went on to state that, "The language of my amendment does not require reverse discrimination. It only requires that each individual be judged on merit, without regard to sex." Id.
Despite this lengthy process, Title IX was passed without much debate as to several of its key exemption provisions. For example, early on it was unclear whether Congress intended to regulate intercollegiate athletics. For this reason, the statute was amended in 1974 to direct the Department of Health Education and Welfare to publish proposed implementing regulations, with a provision stating that such regulations shall include with respect to intercollegiate athletic activities, reasonable provisions considering the nature of the particular sports.7
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require or prohibit any person, or public or private entity, to provide or pay for any benefit or services, including the use of facilities, related to an abortion. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit a penalty to be imposed on any person or individual because such person or individual is seeking or has received any benefit or service related to a legal abortion. 20 U.S.C. ï½§1688.
Consistent with the Danforth Amendment, the Title IX common rule does not require or prohibit any person, or public or private entity, to provide or pay for any benefit or service, including the use of facilities, related to an abortion. However, medical procedures, benefits, services, and the use of facilities, necessary to save the life of a pregnant woman or to address complications related to an abortion are not subject to this section. 65 Fed. Reg. 52869 (2000)(Section __.235(d)(1)). Moreover, the Title IX common rule prohibits a recipient from discriminating against, excluding, or denying benefits to a person because that person has obtained, sought, or will seek an abortion. This prohibition applies to any service or benefit for an applicant (for enrollment or employment), student, or employee. 65 Fed. Reg. 52869 (2000)(Section __.235(d)(2)).
In addition, the CRRA expanded the exemption for entities controlled by religious organizations. Under the CRRA, the exemption is no longer limited to educational institutions that are controlled by religious organizations with tenets contrary to Title IX. Instead, any educational operation of an entity may be exempt from Title IX due to control by a religious organization with tenets that are not consistent with the provisions of Title IX. Further, the exemption would apply to a particular education program operated by a recipient if this separate program is subject to religious tenets that are not consistent with Title IX.
An educational institution or other entity that wishes to claim the exemption set forth in paragraph (a) of this section shall do so by submitting in writing to the designated agency official a statement by the highest-ranking official of the institution, identifying the provisions of these Title IX regulations that conflict with a specific tenet of the religious organization.
Section ___.205(b). The preamble to the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking of the Title IX common rule explains that if a recipient has already obtained an exemption from the Department of Education, such exemption may be submitted to another funding agency as a basis for an exemption from the second funding agency. 64 Fed. Reg. 58570 (1999).
Title IX requires that agencies promulgate regulations to provide guidance to recipients of federal financial assistance who administer education programs or activities on Title IX enforcement. After the passage of Title IX, the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW) adopted implementing regulations. 40 Fed. Reg. 24128 (1975). When HEW split in 1980 into two departments, the Department of Education and the Department of Health and Human Services, each new agency adopted the regulations. See 34 C.F.R. Part 106 and 45 C.F.R. Part 86, respectively. Two other federal agencies, the Department of Agriculture and the Department of Energy, also published Title IX rules around that same time.9
On October 29, 1999 the Department of Justice and 23 other agencies published a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking to implement Title IX. See 64 Fed. Reg. 58567 (1999). In the Title IX common rule, the substantive nondiscrimination obligations of recipients, for the most part, are identical to those established by the Department of Education under Title IX. However, the rule reflects statutory changes to Title IX, such as those resulting from passage of the CRRA, and modifications to ensure consistency with Supreme Court precedent. After receiving and reviewing comments, and making a few additional changes to the regulations in response to these comments, the Department of Justice and 20 other participating agencies published the final Title IX common rule on August 30, 2000.10 See 65 Fed. Reg. 52857 (2000).
(ii) Scholarships, loans, grants, wages, or other funds extended to any entity for payment to or on behalf of students admitted to that entity, or extended directly to such students for payment to that entity
(2) A grant of Federal real or personal property or any interest therein, including surplus property, and the proceeds of the sale or transfer of such property, if the Federal share of the fair market value of the property is not, upon such sale or transfer, properly accounted for to the Federal Government.
(4) Sale or lease of Federal property or any interest therein at nominal consideration, or at consideration reduced for the purpose of assisting the recipient or in recognition of public interest to be served thereby, or permission to use Federal property or any interest therein without consideration
65 Fed. Reg. 52866 (2000).13 No extended discussion is necessary to show that money, through federal grants, cooperative agreements and loans, is federal financial assistance within the meaning of Title IX. See Paralyzed Veterans, 477 U.S. at 607 n.11. For example:
United States military veterans are enrolled at Holy University, a private, religious university. The veterans receive payments from the federal government for educational pursuits and such monies are used by the veterans to pay a portion of their respective tuition payments at Holy University. Although federal payments are direct to the veterans and indirect to Holy University, the university is receiving federal financial assistance.
As set forth in the Title IX common rule, federal financial assistance may be in the form of a grant of land or use (rental) of federal property for the recipient at no or reduced cost. Since the recipient pays nothing or a lower amount for ownership of land or rental of property, the recipient is being assisted financially by the federal agency. Typically, assurances state that this type of assistance is considered to be ongoing for as long as the land or property is being used for the original or a similar purpose for which such assistance was intended. E.g., 65 Fed. Reg. 52867 at ï½§__.115. Moreover, regulations also generally bind the successors and transferees of this property, as long as the original purpose, or a similar objective, is pursued. 65 Fed. Reg. 52867 at ï½§ .115. Thus, if the recipient uses the land or rents property for the same purpose at the time of the alleged discriminatory act, the recipient is receiving federal financial assistance, irrespective of when the land was granted or donated.
Sixteen years ago, the Department of Defense (DOD) donated land from a closed military base to a State social services agency as the location for a training facility for caseworkers. The training facility has been built and is in use by the State. Students at the training facility allege sexual harassment against certain training facilitators. Because the State still uses the land donated to it by the DOD for its original (or similar purpose), the State is still receiving federal financial assistance from DOD and DOD has jurisdiction to investigate the complaint under Title IX. See 32 C.F.R. ï½§ 195.6.
A police department has a training facility located in a housing project built, subsidized, and operated with Housing and Urban Development (HUD) funds. The police department is not charged rent. Thus, the police department is receiving federal financial assistance and is subject to Title IX.
Under the Intergovernmental Personnel Act of 1970, federal agencies may allow a temporary assignment of personnel to State, local, and Indian tribal governments, institutions of higher education, federally funded research and development centers, and certain other organizations for work of mutual concern and benefit. See 5 U.S.C. ï½§ 3372. This detail of federal personnel to a State or other entity is considered federal financial assistance, even if the entity reimburses the federal agency for some of the detailed employee's federal salary. See Paralyzed Veterans, 477 U.S. at 612 n.14. However, if the State or other entity fully reimburses the federal agency for the employee's salary, it is unlikely that the entity receives federal financial assistance. For example:
Two research scientists from the National Institute of Health (NIH) are detailed to a university research organization for two years to help research treatments for cancer. NIH pays for three-fourths of the salary of the two detailed employees, while the organization pays the remaining portion. The research organization is considered to be receiving federal financial assistance since the federal government is paying a substantial portion of the salary of the detailed federal employees. The research organization is thus now subject to Title IX.
Federal financial assistance may be received directly or indirectly.14 For example, colleges indirectly receive federal financial assistance when they accept students who pay, in part, with federal financial aid directly distributed to the students. Grove City College v. Bell, 465 U.S. 555, 564 (1984)15; see also Bob Jones Univ. v. Johnson, 396 F. Supp. 597, 603 (D. S.C. 1974), aff'd, 529 F.2d 514 (4th Cir. 1975). In Bob Jones Univ., 396 F. Supp. at 603, cited with approval in Grove City, 465 U.S. at 564, the university was deemed to have received federal financial assistance for participating in a program wherein veterans received monies directly from the Veterans Administration to support approved educational pursuits, although the veterans were not required to use the specific federal monies to pay the schools for tuition and expenses. Bob Jones Univ., 396 F. Supp. at 602-03 & n.22. Even if the financial aid to the veterans did not reach the university, the court considered this financial assistance to the school since this released the school's funds for other purposes. Id. at 602. Thus, an entity may be deemed to have "received Federal financial assistance" even if the entity did not show a "financial gain, in the sense of a net increment in its assets." Id. at 602-03. Aid such as this, and noncapital grants, are equally federal financial assistance. Id.
Similarly, statutory programs or regulations that directly or indirectly support, or establish guidelines for, an entity's operations are not federal financial assistance. Herman, 60 F.3d at 1382 (Neither Labor regulations establishing apprenticeship programs nor Davis-Bacon Act wage protections are federal financial assistance.); Steptoe v. Savings of America, 800 F. Supp. 1542, 1548 (N.D. Ohio 1992) (Mortgage lender subject to federal banking laws does not receive federal financial assistance.); Rannels v. Hargrove, 731 F. Supp. 1214, 1222-23 (E.D. Pa. 1990) (federal bank regulations are not federal financial assistance under the Age Discrimination Act).
Furthermore, programs "owned and operated" by the federal government, such as the air traffic control system, do not constitute federal financial assistance. Paralyzed Veterans, 477 U.S. at 612; Jacobson v. Delta Airlines, 742 F.2d 1202, 1213 (9th Cir. 1984) (air traffic control and national weather service programs do not constitute federal financial assistance).16110 Cong. Rec. 13380 (1964).
It also should be noted that while contracts of guaranty and insurance may constitute federal financial assistance, Title IX specifically states that it does not apply to contracts of insurance or guaranty. See 20 U.S.C. ï½§ 1682; see Gallagher v. Croghan Colonial Bank, 89 F.3d 275, 277-78 (6th Cir. 1996) (Default insurance for bank's disbursement of federal student loans is a "contract of insurance," and excluded from Section 504 coverage by agency regulations). But see Moore v. Sun Bank, 923 F.2d 1423, 1427 (11th Cir. 1991) (loans guaranteed by the Small Business Administration constituted federal financial assistance since Section 504 does not exclude contracts of insurance or guarantee from coverage as does Title IX).
Procurement contracts also are not considered federal financial assistance. DeVargas v. Mason & Hanger-Silas Mason Co., 911 F.2d 1377 (10th Cir. 1990); Jacobson, 742 F.2d at 1209; Muller v. Hotsy Corp., 917 F. Supp. 1389, 1418 (N.D. Iowa 1996) (procurement contract by company with GSA to provide supplies is not federal financial assistance); Hamilton v. Illinois Cent. R.R. Co., 894 F. Supp. 1014, 1020 (S.D. Miss. 1995). A distinction must be made between procurement contracts at fair market value and subsidies; the former is not federal financial assistance although the latter is. Jacobson, 742 F.2d at 1209; Mass v. Martin Marietta Corp., 805 F. Supp. 1530, 1542 (D. Co. 1992) (federal payments for goods pursuant to a contract, even if greater than fair market value, do not constitute federal financial assistance). As described in Jacobson and followed in DeVargas, there need not be a detailed analysis of whether a contract is at fair market value, but instead a focus on whether the government intended to provide a subsidy to the contractor. DeVargas, 911 F.2d at 1382-83; Jacobson, 742 F.2d at 1210. In DeVargas, a Department of Energy contract, issued through a competitive bidding process after a determination that a private entity could provide the service in a less costly manner, evidenced no intention to provide a subsidy to the contractor. Id. at 1382-83. For example:
Dept. of Transportation (DOT) contracts with TechStuff, a private company that provides training on the use of computers for a subway system. Under the contract, full price is paid by DOT for the training to be provided by TechStuff. Because this is a direct procurement contract by the federal government, the funds paid to TechStuff by DOT do not subject TechStuff to Title IX.
A "recipient" is an entity that receives federal financial assistance and that operates "an education program or activity," and is thus subject to Title IX. The Title IX common rule provides as follows:
The term recipient means any State or political subdivision thereof, or any instrumentality of a State or political subdivision thereof, any public or private agency, institution, or organization, or other entity, or any person, to whom Federal financial assistance is extended directly or through another recipient and that operates an education program or activity that receives such assistance, including any subunit, successor, assignee, or transferee thereof.
Several aspects of the plain language of the regulations should be noted. First, a recipient may be a public (e.g., a State, local or municipal agency) or a private entity. Second, Title IX does not apply to the federal government. Therefore, a federal agency cannot be considered a "recipient" within the meaning of Title IX. Third, there may be more than one recipient in a program of federal financial assistance; that is, a primary recipient (e.g., State agency) that transfers or distributes assistance to a subrecipient (local entity) for distribution to an ultimate beneficiary.18 Fourth, a recipient also encompasses a successor, transferee, or assignee of the federal assistance (property or otherwise), under certain circumstances. Fifth, as discussed in detail below, there is a distinction between a recipient and a beneficiary. Finally, although not addressed in the regulations, a recipient may receive federal assistance either directly from the federal government or indirectly through a third party, who is not necessarily another recipient. For example, schools are indirect recipients when they accept payments from students who directly receive federal financial aid.
The clearest means of identifying a "recipient" of federal financial assistance covered by Title IX is to determine whether the entity has voluntarily entered into a direct relationship with the federal government and receives federal assistance under a condition or assurance of compliance with Title IX. See Paralyzed Veterans, 477 U.S. at 605-606.
By limiting coverage to recipients, Congress imposes the obligations of ï½§ 504 [and Title IX] upon those who are in a position to accept or reject those obligations as part of the decision whether or not to "receive" federal funds.
Id. at 606; see also Soberal-Perez, 717 F.2d at 40-41. It is important to note that, by signing an assurance, the recipient is committing itself to complying with nondiscrimination mandates.19 Even without a written assurance, courts describe obligations under nondiscrimination laws as similar to a contract, and have thus concluded that "the recipients' acceptance of the funds triggers coverage under the nondiscrimination provision." Paralyzed Veterans, 477 U.S. at 605. In this scenario, the recipient has a direct relationship with the funding agency and, therefore, is subject to the requirements of Title IX. For example:
Six years ago, LegalSkool, a law school at a university, was built partly with federal grants, loans, and interest subsidies in excess of $7 million from the Department of Education (ED). The law school is a "recipient" because of the funding from ED for construction purposes.
While showing that the entity directly receives a federal grant, loan, or contract (other than a contract of insurance or guaranty) is the easiest means of identifying a Title IX recipient, this direct cash flow does not describe the full reach of Title IX.20
A recipient may receive funds either directly or indirectly. Grove City College, 465 U.S. at 564-65.21 For example, educational institutions receive federal financial assistance indirectly when they accept students who pay, in part, with federal loans. Although the money is paid directly to the students, the universities and other educational institutions are the indirect recipients. Id.; Bob Jones Univ., 396 F. Supp. at 602.
In contrast, as subsequently explained by the Supreme Court in Paralyzed Veterans, it is essential to distinguish aid that flows indirectly to a recipient from aid to a recipient that reaches a beneficiary.
While Grove City stands for the proposition that Title IX coverage extends to Congress' intended recipient, whether receiving the aid directly or indirectly, it does not stand for the proposition that federal coverage follows the aid past the recipient to those who merely benefit from the aid.
Along these lines, the Supreme Court in NCAA v. Smith, 525 U.S. 459, 470 (1999), citing both Grove City and Paralyzed Veterans, stated that while dues paid to an entity (NCAA) by colleges and universities, who were recipients of federal financial assistance, "at most ... demonstrates that it [NCAA] indirectly benefits from the federal assistance afforded its afforded members." But the Court stated, "This showing, without more, is insufficient to trigger Title IX coverage. Smith, 525 U.S. at 468.22
Furthermore, Title IX regulations provide that land originally acquired through a program receiving federal financial assistance must include a covenant binding on subsequent purchasers or transferees that requires nondiscrimination for as long as the land is used for the original or a similar purpose for which the federal assistance is extended. 65 Fed. Reg. 52867 at ï½§ .115 (2000).23
Many programs have two recipients. The primary recipient directly receives the federal financial assistance. The primary recipient then distributes the federal assistance to a subrecipient to carry out a program. Both the primary recipient and subrecipient must conform their actions to Title IX (and other nondiscrimination laws). For example:
A State agency, such as the Department of Children and Family Services, receives a substantial portion of its funding from the federal government. The State agency, as the primary recipient or conduit, in turn, funds local social service organizations, in part, with its federal funds. The local agencies receive federal financial assistance, and thus are subject to Section 504 (and other nondiscrimination laws). See Graves v. Methodist Youth Servs., Inc., 624 F. Supp. 429 (N.D. Ill. 1985).24 Education programs conducted by the State Department of Children and Family Services and by the local social service organizations are all covered by Title IX.
A recipient may not absolve itself of its Title IX and other nondiscrimination obligations by hiring a contractor or agent to perform or deliver assistance to beneficiaries. Agency regulations consistently state that prohibitions against discriminatory conduct, whether intentional or through sex neutral means with an unjustified disparate impact, apply to a recipient, whether committed "directly or through contractual or other arrangements." E.g., 28 C.F.R. ï½§ï½§ 42.104(b)(1), (2) (emphasis added). For example:
A recipient department of corrections contracts with a tutoring company to provide vocational training to inmates. Employees of the contractor refuse to admit female prisoners to a welding training class the contractor is conducting. The recipient is liable under Title IX for the contractor's actions as the contractor is performing a program function of the recipient.
One also should evaluate the agency's assurances or certifications; such documents can provide an independent basis to seek enforcement. For example, the assurance for the Office of Justice Programs, within the Department of Justice, states, inter alia,
An assistance program may have many beneficiaries, that is, individuals and/or entities that directly or indirectly receive an advantage through the operation of a federal program. Beneficiaries, however, do not enter into any formal contract or agreement or sign an assurance with the federal government where compliance with Title VI (or Title IX) is a condition of receiving the assistance. Paralyzed Veterans, 477 U.S. at 606-607.
In almost any major federal program, Congress may intend to benefit a large class of persons, yet it may do so by funding - that is, extending federal financial assistance to - a limited class of recipients. Section 504, like Title IX in Grove City, 465 U.S. 555 (1984), draws the line of federal regulatory coverage between the recipient and the beneficiary.
Id. at 609-10. Title IX was meant to cover only those situations where federal funding is given to a non-federal entity which, in turn, provides financial assistance to the ultimate beneficiary, or disburses federal assistance to another recipient for ultimate distribution to a beneficiary.25 It is important to note that the Supreme Court has firmly established that the receipt of student loans or grants by an entity renders the entity a recipient of federal financial assistance. See Grove City 465 U.S. at 569.
In Paralyzed Veterans, a Section 504 case decided under Department of Transportation regulations, the Court held that commercial airlines that used airports and gained an advantage from the capital improvements and construction at airports were beneficiaries, and not recipients, under the airport improvement program. The airport operators, in contrast, directly receive the federal financial assistance for the airport construction. The Court examined the program statutes and concluded:
Congress recognized a need to improve airports in order to benefit a wide variety of persons and entities, all of them classified together as beneficiaries. [note omitted]. Congress did not set up a system where passengers were the primary or direct beneficiaries, and all others benefitted by the Acts are indirect recipients of the financial assistance to airports....The statute covers only those who receive the aid, but does not extend as far as those who benefit from it....Congress tied the regulatory authority to those programs or activities that receive federal financial assistance.
As explained below, outside the context of traditional educational institutions, a fact-specific inquiry is required to determine which portions of a covered program or activity are educational, and thus covered by Title IX. In light of the broad sweep envisioned for Title IX, and the expansive notion of institution-wide coverage mandated by the CRRA, such inquiries must be made as broadly as possible.
Before examining the question of what constitutes a covered education program or activity under Title IX, as amended by the CRRA, it is helpful to take a closer look at the CRRA and the expansive definition of "program" and "program or activity" enacted by this amendment.
(B) the entity of such state or local government that distributes such assistance and each such department or agency (and each other State or local government entity) to which the assistance is extended, in the case of assistance to a State or local government;
(B) the entire plant or other comparable, geographically separate facility to which Federal financial assistance is extended, in the case of any other corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship; or
It is clear that the CRRA was designed to establish broad institution-wide coverage for Title IX, Title VI, Section 504, and the Age Discrimination Act. However, by defining only "program or activity," the CRRA did not directly address the question of how to interpret the modifier "education" for purposes of Title IX coverage. As a result, coverage under Title IX involves an issue of statutory interpretation that does not arise for the other three civil rights statutes, namely: to what extent does "education" provide a limitation on the concept of institution-wide coverage embodied in the CRRA?
If a private hospital corporation is extended federal assistance for its emergency rooms, all the operations of the hospital, including for example, the operating rooms, the pediatrics department, admissions, discharge offices, etc., are covered by Title VI, Section 504, and the Age Discrimination Act. Since Title IX is limited to education programs or activities, it would apply only to the students and employees of education programs operated by the hospital, if any.
In conducting such factual inquiries, it is important to remember that determinations as to what constitutes a covered education program must be made as broadly as possible. This principle is consistent with both the broad sweep of coverage originally envisioned for Title IX as well as the expansive notion of institution-wide coverage mandated by the CRRA.
Notably, the Ninth Circuit has concluded that it is appropriate to conduct just such a fact-specific inquiry in order to determine the proper scope of coverage under Title IX. In Jeldness v. Pearce, 30 F.3d 1220 (9th Cir. 1994), the court determined that whether various components of a correctional facility, such as the prison industries, the farm annex, or the forest work camp, constituted an "educational" program within the meaning of Title IX was a question of fact. Jeldness, 30 F.3d at 1226.
Title IX was modeled after Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and they both share a common purpose: to ensure that public funds derived from all the people are not utilized in ways that encourage, subsidize, permit, or result in prohibited discrimination against some of the people.29 Towards that end, both Title VI and Title IX broadly prohibit conduct by a recipient of federal financial assistance that results in a person being "excluded from participation in, . . . denied the benefits of, or . . . subjected to discrimination under" a federally-assisted program or activity.30
Title IX, like Title VI, recognizes three general types of prohibited discrimination: (1) disparate treatment, (2) disparate impact, and (3) retaliation. Any effective and meaningful administrative enforcement program under Title IX must be prepared to address all three.
Disparate treatment33 refers to actions that treat similarly situated persons differently on the basis of a prohibited classification. In the case of Title IX, the prohibited classification is sex. Under the disparate treatment theory of discrimination, the core question is whether a recipient, through its officials, has treated people differently on the basis of sex. Here, the applicable legal standards under Title VI and Title IX are generally identical and investigative officials can rely on case law decided under Title VI in establishing violations under Title IX.34
Evidence of discriminatory intent may be direct or circumstantial and may be found from various sources, including statements by decision makers, the historical background of the events in issue, the sequence of events leading to the decision in issue, a departure from standard procedure (e.g., failure to consider factors normally considered), legislative or administrative history (e.g., minutes of meetings), a past history of discriminatory or segregated conduct, and statistical evidence.37
Direct proof of discriminatory intent is often unavailable. In the absence of such evidence, claims of intentional discrimination under Title IX may be analyzed using the Title VII burden-shifting framework established by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973).38
Applying the McDonnell Douglas principles to a Title IX claim, the investigating agency must first determine whether the case file raises an inference of discrimination, i.e., the investigating agency must establish a prima facie case. The elements of a prima facie case may vary depending on the facts of the complaint, but such elements often include the following:
In contrast to disparate treatment, which focuses on the intent to cause sex-based results, disparate impact focuses on the consequences of a facially sex-neutral policy or practice. Under this theory of discrimination, the core inquiry focuses on the results of the action taken, rather than the underlying intent.46 Because of this difference in focus, evidence of a discriminatory intent or purpose is not required. Indeed, "intent" is not an element in the disparate impact analysis.
Under the disparate impact theory, a recipient violates agency regulations by using a neutral procedure or practice that has a disparate impact on protected individuals, and such practice lacks a substantial legitimate justification. As in Title VI disparate impact cases, the elements of a Title IX disparate impact claim derive from the analysis of cases decided under Title VII disparate impact law. 49
In a disparate impact case, the focus of the investigation concerns the consequences of the recipient's practices, rather than the recipient's intent.50 To establish discrimination under a disparate impact scheme, the investigating agency must first ascertain whether the recipient utilized a facially neutral practice that had a disproportionate impact on the basis of sex.51 In doing so, the investigating agency must do more than demonstrate that the practice or policy in question is a "bad idea."52 The agency must show a causal connection between the facially neutral policy and the disproportionate and adverse impact on a protected group.53
If the evidence establishes a prima facie case, the investigating agency must then determine whether the recipient can articulate a "substantial legitimate justification" for the challenged practice.54 "Substantial legitimate justification" is similar to the Title VII concept of "business necessity," which involves showing that the policy or practice in question is related to performance on the job.55
If the recipient can make such a showing, the inquiry then turns to whether there are any "equally effective alternative practices" that would result in less adverse impact.58 Evidence of either will support a finding of liability.
In evaluating a potential disparate impact violation, it is important to examine whether there is a substantial legitimate justification for the challenged practice and whether there exists an alternative practice that is comparably effective with less of a disparate impact.62
[B]ut the district court did not consider, much less analyze, whether the defendants had shown a substantial legitimate justification for this allocation. The MTA and the State identified several factors favoring a higher subsidization of the commuter lines. By encouraging suburban residents not to drive into the City, subsidization of the commuter rails minimizes congestion and pollution levels associated with greater use of automobiles in the city; encourages business to locate in the City; and provides additional fare-paying passengers to the City subway and bus system. In these respects and in others, subsidizing the commuter rails may bring material benefits to the minority riders of the subway and bus system. The district court dismissed such factors, concluding that the MTA board did not explicitly consider them before voting on the NYCTA and commuter line fare increases. That finding is largely irrelevant to whether such considerations would justify the relative allocation of total funds to the NYCTA and the commuter lines (emphasis added).
Similarly, in Young by and through Young v. Montgomery County (Ala) Bd. of Educ.,64 the court ruled that even if a disparate impact were assumed, the defendants had established a "substantial legitimate justification."
The Title IX regulations incorporate the requirement in the Title VI regulations, which provides that "[n]o recipient or other person shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any individual for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege secured by [Title VI], or because he has made a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding or hearing under this subpart."68
Retaliation protections are designed to preserve the integrity and effectiveness of the enforcement process itself. Because of this purpose, the merits of any underlying complaint of sex discrimination are irrelevant in assessing a retaliation complaint.69 The prohibited conduct is the act of retaliation itself.
Moreover, protected activities include more than filing complaints seeking a vindication of personal rights.70 The Department believes that a narrow reading requiring the prior exercise of personal rights is inconsistent with the broad remedial purposes behind Title IX itself.71 It is important to re-emphasize that Title VI agency anti-retaliation regulations (incorporated into Title IX regulations) provide "[n]o recipient or other person shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any individual for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege secured by [Title VI], . . ." Thus, anyone who asserts rights secured by Title IX is protected. Retaliation claims have their own remedial purpose in that they seek to ensure that rights created under a federal civil rights statute do not go unenforced for fear of adverse official reaction.72 This goal is undercut if recipients are allowed to retaliate against persons subject to their authority who publicly object to discrimination against others.
Consistent with this construction, most federal agencies have joined in adopting final regulations implementing Title IX which broadly prohibit "discrimination in employment, or recruitment, consideration, or selection therefor, whether full-time or part-time, under any education program or activity operated by a recipient that receives Federal financial assistance."76
In resolving employment actions, the courts have generally held that the substantive standards and policies developed under Title VII to define discriminatory employment conduct apply with equal force to employment actions brought under Title IX.
. . .[W]hen a plaintiff complains of discrimination with regard to conditions of employment in an institution of higher learning, the method of evaluating Title IX gender discrimination claims is the same as those in a Title VII case.77
The use of case law and policies developed under Title VII is similarly appropriate in the administrative setting. In conducting investigations alleging employment discrimination, agencies shall consider Title VII case law and EEOC Guidelines, 29 CFR parts 1604-1607, unless inapplicable, in determining whether a recipient of Federal financial assistance has engaged in an unlawful employment practice.78
As noted above, the Title IX common rule specifically incorporates the disparate impact standard as part of its prohibitions against sex-based employment discrimination.83 In addition, the Title IX common rule applies its prohibition against sex-based discrimination to the full range of activities related to the recruitment, evaluation, classification, payment, assignment, retention or treatment of employees.84 The Title IX common rule addresses various areas including the treatment of pregnancy as a temporary disability, pre-employment inquiries regarding marital or parental status, imposition of employment criteria or testing devices having a disproportionate impact, recruitment, and compensation and benefits (including equal pension contributions and benefits).
Where the Title IX common rule does not address some aspect of the employment relationship or where more detailed guidance is required beyond that provided by the Title IX common rule (and if there is no relevant guidance issued by the Department of Education interpreting its Title IX regulations), agency officials should review and apply the applicable standards and policies developed under Title VII.
Two areas raise special considerations requiring specific discussion. In some cases, recipients may attempt to modify their obligations under Title IX in an effort to comply with other legal or contractual obligations. In other cases, recipients may attempt to create sex-sensitive criteria for employment in specific types of positions.
(a) Prohibitory requirements. The obligation to comply with ï½§ï½§___.500 through ___.550 is not obviated or alleviated by the existence of any State or local law or other requirement that imposes prohibitions or limits upon employment of members of one sex that are not imposed upon members of the other sex.
Thus, in cases of conflict between the requirements of Title IX and obligations imposed by local law or third party contracts, Title IX controls. If an entity does not want to follow Title IX, it is free to simply decline federal financial assistance but it still may be subject to Title VII.
In evaluating claims that sex-based job qualifications are justified as a BFOQ, agency investigative officials should consult and apply the standards and case law developed under Title VII with respect to this narrow exception.
Complaints received by federal agencies that allege sex-based employment discrimination should be processed in conformity with the "Procedures for Complaints of Employment Discrimination Filed Against Recipients of Federal Financial Assistance."86 These Joint Complaint Procedures, promulgated jointly by the Department of Justice and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in 1983, are intended to "reduce duplicative efforts by different Federal agencies . . . reduce the burden on employers [and] allow . . . agencies to focus their resources on allegations of services discrimination."87 As discussed below, these procedures require referral of employment complaints to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in some circumstances.
Under the Joint Complaint Procedures, complaints are deemed filed with the EEOC as of the date the complaint was received by the sister federal agency. Moreover, the Joint Complaint Procedures require that the recipient be advised of receipt of the employment complaint within 10 days.88 Within 30 days of receipt, the receiving agency is to determine its jurisdiction over the complaint and the procedure under which it will be handled.89
In those cases where the agency does not have jurisdiction over the employment complaint (i.e., the alleged discriminating entity does not receive federal financial assistance or it receives federal financial assistance but does not have an educational component), the agency is to transfer the complaint to the EEOC and advise both the complainant and the recipient of the specific office of the EEOC to which the complaint is being transferred.
Aid or perpetuate discrimination against any person by providing significant assistance to any agency, organization, or person that discriminates on the basis of sex in providing any aid, benefit, or service to students or employees;
Under the Title IX common rule, recipients of federal financial assistance must not discriminate in providing facilities on the basis of sex. A recipient may provide separate toilet, locker room, and shower facilities on the basis of sex. However, such facilities provided to one sex must be comparable to the facilities provided to the other sex. 65 Fed. Reg. at 52871.
A recipient generally may not provide an education program or activity separately on the basis of sex or require or refuse participation by an individual of a certain sex in courses such as health, physical education, industrial, business, vocational, technical, home economics, music, and adult education courses on the basis of sex.91 65 Fed. Reg. 52871. However, in a prison setting, penal necessities may require educational programs and activities to be offered separately on the basis of sex. While separate courses may be offered in a prison setting, penal necessity is not a defense for failing to provide equality of access to comparable educational programs to male and female inmates.
Under the Title IX common rule, a recipient may not discriminate against any person on the basis of sex in the counseling or guidance of students or applicants for admission. Specifically, in appraising or counseling students, a recipient must not use different testing or other materials on the basis of sex or use materials that permit or require different treatment of students on the basis of sex. Such different materials may be used, however, where they cover the same occupational interest areas and their use is shown to be essential to eliminate sex bias. Finally, where a recipient finds that a particular class contains a substantially disproportionate number of individuals of one sex, the recipient must take such action as is necessary to assure itself that such disproportion is not the result of discrimination on the basis of sex in counseling or appraisal materials or by counselors. 65 Fed. Reg. at 52871.
Although recipients are allowed to administer or assist in administering specific sex-restricted scholarships, fellowships, or other forms of financial assistance to students through a domestic or foreign will, trust, bequest, or similar instrument, the Title IX regulations require that the overall effect of such sex-restricted financial assistance not discriminate on the basis of sex. 65 Fed. Reg. 52872 at ï½§___.430(b). To ensure compliance with Title IX regulations, recipients must develop and use procedures that select students to be awarded financial assistance in a nondiscriminatory manner and not on the basis of availability of funds restricted to members of a particular sex. 65 Fed. Reg. 52872 at ï½§ .430(b)(2)(i). This means that a recipient cannot deny a scholarship or other financial assistance to an individual because the available monies are restricted to members of a particular sex. For example, recipients must select in a sex neutral fashion who is eligible for assistance. They are than free to allocate assistance to those selected individuals from among sex restricted scholarships. However, they cannot deny assistance to selected individuals because scholarships or other financial assistance is sex restricted.92
A recipient who assists any agency, organization, or person in making employment available to its students must ensure that the employment is not provided in a discriminatory manner on the basis of sex. If the agency, organization, or person is offering employment in a discriminatory manner, the recipient must not assist such an agency, organization, or person by providing its employment service. 65 Fed. Reg. 52872 at ï½§ ___.435(a)(1),(2).
Under the Title IX common rule, a recipient must not discriminate on the basis of sex in providing health and insurance benefits or services. Specifically, the provision of such benefits and services to students must meet the same requirements as outlined in the employee provisions of the common rule. 65 Fed. Reg. at 52873-52874. However, these provisions do not prohibit a recipient from providing any benefit or service that may be used by a different proportion of students of one sex than of the other, including family planning services. However, any recipient that provides full coverage health service must provide gynecological care. 65 Fed. Reg. at 52872.
No person shall on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, be treated differently from another person, or otherwise be discriminated against in any interscholastic, intercollegiate, club or intramural athletics offered by a recipient, and no recipient shall provide such athletics separately on such basis.
a recipient may operate or sponsor separate teams for members of each sex where selection for such teams is based upon competitive skill or the activity involved is a contact sport. However, where a recipient operates or sponsors no such team for members of the other sex, and athletic opportunities for members of that sex have previously been limited, members of the excluded sex must be allowed to try out for the team offered unless the sport involved is a contact sport. For the purposes of these Title IX regulations, contact sports include boxing, wrestling, rugby, ice hockey, football, basketball, and other sports the purpose or major activity of which involves bodily contact.
The regulations go on to provide that a recipient that operates or sponsors interscholastic, intercollegiate, club, or intramural athletics shall provide equal opportunity for members of both sexes. A number of factors are set forth to determine equality of opportunity including but not limited to the provision of equipment, scheduling of games and practice time, travel and per diem allowances, assignment and compensation of coaches, provision of locker rooms, provision of medical and training facilities, provision of housing and dining facilities and publicity. See 65 Fed. Reg. 52873 - 52874 at ï½§ ___.450(c).
The regulations give a recipient that operates or sponsors interscholastic, intercollegiate, club, or intramural athletics at the elementary, secondary, and postsecondary school levels an adjustment period to come into compliance with these requirements. No such adjustment period is set forth for other recipients. See 65 Fed. Reg. 52873 at ï½§ ___.450(d).
Title IX protects students from sexual harassment in educational programs or activities operated by recipients of federal funding. The protection against sexual harassment derives from the general prohibitions against sex discrimination contained in the Title IX common rule at _.400. Those provisions state in relevant part:
(a)General. Except as provided elsewhere in these Title IX regulations, no person shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be subjected to discrimination under any . . . education program or activity operated by a recipient that receives Federal financial assistance.
(6) Aid of perpetuate discrimination against any person by providing significant assistance to any agency, organization, or person that discriminates on the basis of sex in providing any aid, benefit or service to students or employees:
(a) Remedial action. If the designated agency official finds that a recipient has discriminated against persons on the basis of sex in an education program or activity, such recipient shall take such remedial action as the designated agency official deems necessary to overcome the effects of such discrimination.
Title IX prohibits sexual harassment by teachers or other employees of the federally funded entity administering an education program or activity. Gebser v. Lago Vista Indep. Sch. Dist., 524 U.S. 274 (1998)(school liable for money damages in private litigation under Title IX for teacher/student sex harassment if school had actual knowledge of the misconduct and was deliberately indifferent); Franklin v. Gwinnett County Pub. Sch., 503 U.S. 60 (1992)(coach/teacher sexual harassment of high school student actionable under Title IX).
While it is clear that discrimination in violation of Title IX must be "on the basis of sex," courts have held that subjecting an individual to sex stereotyping may constitute sex discrimination in appropriate circumstances. In Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, 490 U.S. 228, 250 (1989), a Title VII case, the plaintiff was denied partnership in an accounting firm, due, in part, to the attitudes of the senior partners who described her as "macho" and advised her to wear makeup and jewelry and to dress in more feminine clothing. Id. at 235. The Supreme Court explained:
In the specific context of sex stereotyping, an employer who acts on the basis of a belief that a woman cannot be aggressive, or that she must not be, has acted on the basis of gender... As for the legal relevance of sex stereotyping, we are beyond the day when an employer could evaluate employees by assuming or insisting that they match the stereotype associated with their group, for in forbidding employers to discriminate against individuals because of their sex, Congress intended to strike at the spectrum of disparate treatment of men and women result from sex stereotypes.
Several circuit courts have also addressed gender-based harassment on the basis of stereotyping. Higgins v. New Balance Athletic Shoe, Inc., 194 F. 3d 252 (1st Cir. 1999)(Title VII); Galdieri-Ambrosini v. National Realty & Dev. Corp., 136 F. 3d 276, 289 (2nd Cir. 1998)(Title VII)("Evidence of sexual stereotyping may provide proof that an employment decision or an abusive environment was based on gender.")(citing Price Waterhouse, 490 U.S. at 250-51 (Title VII); Lindahl v. Air France, 930 F. 2d 1434, 1439 (Title VII)(9th Cir. 1991); Sheehan v. Purolator, Inc., 839 F. 2d 99, 106-77 (Title VII)(2nd Cir.)(Kearse, J., dissenting, cert. denied, 488 U.S. 891, 109 S.Ct. 226 (1988)). Since Title VII legal theories are often used by courts to evaluate Title IX claims, sex stereotyping may violate the Title IX prohibition of discrimination on the basis of sex. The fact that the harassment was based on the perception that the individual was not properly "manly" or "feminine" may, in appropriate circumstances, be the basis for a sex stereotyping claim filed under Title IX.
Furthermore, a policy specifically prohibiting sexual harassment and separate grievance procedures for violations of that policy can help ensure that all participants, instructors, employees, third parties, etc. understand the nature of sexual harassment and that the education program provider will not tolerate such conduct. Id.
The procedures outlined in this chapter are based on those provided in the Title IX common rule 65 F.R. 52867 (ï½§ï½§ __.110 - __.140). The procedural requirements discussed in this chapter are also codified in the Department of Education Title IX implementing regulations, 34 C.F.R. ï½§ 106.4 - 106.9. Where the Title IX common rule differs from the Department of Education regulation, we have so noted.93
Generally, the assurance obligates the applicant or recipient to comply with Title IX for the period during which the federal funding is extended. However, with respect to real property provided to operate an education program or activity, the assurance obligates the recipient (or a subsequent transferee) for the period during which the real property is used to provide an education program or activity. Likewise, if the federal funding consists of personal property such as computers, copiers, etc., the assurance remains in effect for the entire time the recipient retains ownership or possession of the property.
It is important to note that the self-evaluation requirement in the Title IX common rule applies only to recipients that are educational institutions (i.e., elementary and secondary schools, high schools, colleges, universities, etc.) that receive federal financial assistance. It does not apply to other educational programs and activities. For example, a prison that receives federal funds from the Department of Justice to administer a vocational training program is not subject to this regulatory requirement.
One of the important aspects of Title IX and its implementing regulations is their requirement that recipients adopt and publish internal grievance procedures to promptly and equitably resolve complaints alleging discrimination on the basis of sex. The responsibility lies with the recipient to establish and maintain a mechanism whereby program participants and employees may seek to redress illegal sex discrimination and whereby the recipient may continually be apprized of and evaluate possible discriminatory policies and procedures and develop strategies to correct discrimination. Although Title IX does not specify a structure for the implementation of a grievance procedure, the U.S. Department of Education has suggested some of the basic components of an effective Title IX grievance procedure in a manual that it has issued on this topic. See Title IX Grievance Procedures: An Introductory Manual, U.S. Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights (1987).
The federal agency providing the financial assistance is primarily responsible for enforcing Title IX as it applies to its recipients. Agencies have several mechanisms available to evaluate whether recipients are in compliance with Title IX, and additional means to enforce or obtain compliance should a recipient's practices be found lacking. Evaluation mechanisms, discussed below, include pre-award reviews, post-award compliance reviews, and investigations of complaints. Because Title IX was patterned after Title VI, the Title IX common rule incorporated by reference the enforcement procedures set forth in the Title VI regulations. 65 Fed. Reg. 52858, 52860 (2000). Accordingly, this section references Title VI cases as well as the Title VI Coordination Regulations and the "Guidelines for the Enforcement of Title VI, Civil Rights Act of 1964," (the "Title VI Guidelines"). See 28 C.F.R. ï½§ï½§ 42.101-42.412 and 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 50.3. The Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights in a January 28, 1999 document entitled: Policy Guidance Document: Enforcement of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Related Statutes in Block Grant-Type Programs97 relied on the Title VI Coordination Regulations for the guidance provided and specifically stated:
This document was drafted specifically with reference to enforcement of Title VI, 42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d, et seq., which prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, and national origin in all Federal programs receiving Federal financial assistance. However, the principles set forth are equally applicable to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, 20 U.S.C. ï½§ 1681, et seq., which prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex in education programs receiving Federal financial assistance; the federally assisted aspects of Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. ï½§ 794, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability in both federally assisted and federally conducted programs; and various fund-granting statutes that contain prohibitions against discrimination.
Agencies should endeavor to ensure that awards of federal financial assistance are only granted to entities that adhere to the substantive nondiscrimination mandates of Title IX and other nondiscrimination laws.
Either at the application stage or the award stage, Federal agencies must ensure that applications for Federal financial assistance contain, be accompanied by, or be covered by a specifically identified assurance from the applicant or recipient, satisfactory to the designated agency official, that each education program or activity operated by the applicant or recipient and to which these Title IX regulations apply will be operated in compliance with these Title IX regulations.
65 Fed. Reg. 52867 ï½§__.115. Regulations requiring applicants to execute an assurance of compliance as a condition for receiving assistance are valid. Grove City College, 465 U.S. at 574-575 (Title IX assurances); Gardner v. Alabama, 385 F.2d 804 (5th Cir. 1967), cert. denied, 389 U.S. 1046 (1968) (Title VI assurances). If an applicant refuses to sign a required assurance, the agency may deny assistance only after providing notice of the noncompliance, an opportunity for a hearing, and other statutory procedures. 42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d-1; 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 50.3 II.A.1. However, the agency need not prove actual discrimination at the administrative hearing, but only that the applicant refused to sign an assurance of compliance with Title IX (or similar nondiscrimination laws). Grove City College, 465 U.S. at 575. Assurances serve two important purposes: they remind prospective recipients of their nondiscrimination obligations, and they provide a basis for the federal government to sue to enforce compliance with these assurances. See United States v. Marion County Sch. Dist., 625 F.2d 607, 609, 612-13 (5th Cir.), reh'g denied, 629 F.2d 1350 (5th Cir. 1980), cert. denied, 451 U.S. 910 (1981).98
This interpretation is a reasonable, and even necessary, application of the statutory remedial scheme. The congressional authorization to obtain relief pre-award would be sharply reduced, if not rendered a near nullity, if agencies could not postpone the assistance decision while spending the time needed to conduct a full and fair investigation and while seeking appropriate relief. Furthermore, the Attorney General's administrative interpretation is entitled to deference. See, e.g., Chevron U.S.A. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 842-45 (1984).100
The Title VI Guidelines recommend that agencies adopt a flexible, case-by-case approach in assessing when deferral is appropriate, and consider the nature of the potential noncompliance problem. Where an assistance application is inadequate on its face, such as when the applicant has failed to provide an assurance or other material required by the agency, "the agency head should defer action on the application pending prompt initiation and completion of [statutory remedial] procedures." 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 50.3 II.A.1 (emphasis added). Where the application is adequate on its face but there are "reasonable grounds" for believing that the applicant is not complying with [Title IX], "the agency head may defer action on the application pending prompt initiation and completion of [statutory remedial] procedures." Id. II.A.2 (emphasis added).101
When action on an assistance application is deferred, remedial efforts "should be conducted without delay and completed as soon as possible." Id. I.A. Agencies should also be cognizant of the time involved in a deferral to ensure that a deferral does not become "tantamount to a final refusal to grant assistance." Id. II.C. The agency should not completely rule out deferrals where time is of the essence in granting the assistance, but should consider special measures that may be taken to seek expedited relief (e.g., by referring the matter to the Department of Justice to file suit for interim injunctive relief).
The Title VI Guidelines provide that the "same [pre-award] rules and procedures would apply" where a federal assistance recipient is granted discretionary authority to dispense the assistance to subrecipients. Id. III:
[T]he Federal Agency should instruct the approving agency -- typically a State agency -- to defer approval or refuse to grant funds, in individual cases in which such action would be taken by the original granting agency itself . . . . Provision should be made for appropriate notice of such action to the Federal agency which retains responsibility for compliance with [Title IX compliance] procedures.
Thus, the Title VI Guidelines support federal agencies requiring that recipients/subgrantors obtain assurances of compliance from subrecipients.102 When the recipient receives information pre-award that indicates noncompliance by an applicant for a subgrant, recipients may defer making the grant decision, may seek a voluntary resolution and, if no settlement is reached, (after complying with statutory procedural requirements), may refuse to award assistance.
Section 42.406(d) of the Title VI Coordination Regulations lists the types of data that should be submitted to and reviewed by federal agencies prior to granting funds. In addition to submitting an assurance that it will compile and maintain records as required, an applicant should provide: (1) notice of all lawsuits (and, for recipients, complaints) filed against it; (2) a description of assistance applications that it has pending in other agencies and of other federal assistance being provided; (3) a description of any civil rights compliance reviews of the applicant during the preceding two years; and (4) a statement as to whether the applicant has been found in noncompliance with any relevant civil rights requirements. Id.
It is recommended that agencies implement an internal screening process whereby agency officials are notified of potential assistance grants and are provided the opportunity to raise a "red flag" or concern about the potential grant recipient.104 If limited resources are a problem, agencies should develop a system to target a significant proportion of assistance applications.105
As part of the Department of Justice's oversight and coordinating function, each agency should submit to the Department, as part of its annual implementation plan, any targeting procedures that are adopted.
Federal agencies are required to maintain an effective program of post-award compliance reviews.107 Federal agency Title VI regulations, which are incorporated into Title IX regulations,108 reiterate this requirement.109 Compliance reviews can be large and complex, or more limited in scope.
Federal agencies have broad discretion in determining which recipients and subrecipients to target for compliance reviews. However, this discretion is not unfettered. In United States v. Harris Methodist Fort Worth, 970 F.2d 94 (5th Cir. 1992), the Fifth Circuit found that a Title VI compliance review involves an administrative search and, therefore, Fourth Amendment requirements for "reasonableness" of a search are applicable. The Court considered three factors: (1) whether the proposed search is authorized by statute; (2) whether the proposed search is properly limited in scope; and (3) how the administrative agency designated the target of the search. Id. at 101; United States v. New Orleans Pub. Serv. (NOPSI III), 723 F.2d 422 (5th Cir.) rehearing en banc denied, 734 F.2d 226 (5th Cir. 1984) (E.O. 11246 compliance review unreasonable) (citing United States v. Mississippi Power & Light Co., 638 F.2d 899 (5th Cir. 1981)); and First Alabama Bank of Montgomery, N.A., v. Donovan, 692 F.2d 714, 721 (11th Cir. 1982) (Exec. Order No. 11246 compliance review reasonable); But see Marshall v. Barlow's Inc., 436 U.S. 307 (1978).110
The Harris Court suggested that selection of a target for a compliance review will be reasonable if it is based either on (1) specific evidence of an existing violation, (2) a showing that "reasonable legislative or administrative standards for conducting an . . . inspection are satisfied with respect to a particular [establishment]," or (3) a showing that the search is "pursuant to an administrative plan containing specific neutral criteria." Harris Methodist, 970 F.2d at 101 (internal citations omitted); NOPSI III, 723 F.2d at 425.
Thus, agencies are cautioned that they should not select targets randomly for compliance reviews but, rather, they should base their decisions on neutral criteria or evidence of a violation. A credible complaint can serve as specific evidence suggesting a violation that could trigger a compliance review.
Apart from complying with the standards outlined above, it is recommended that a decision to conduct a compliance review be set forth in writing and approved by senior civil rights management. An agency may be required to show that it has selected its targets for compliance reviews in an objective, reasonable manner. A contemporaneous, written record that reflects the factors considered will aid in refuting allegations of bias or improper targeting of a recipient. See NOPSI III, 723 F.2d at 428. The written record should identify any regulations or internal guidance that set forth criteria for selection of targets for compliance reviews, and explain how such criteria are met.
Agency Title VI regulations (incorporated into Title IX regulations) are silent as to procedures for conducting compliance reviews, although, as discussed, the Title VI Coordination Regulations provide general guidance as to the types of information to solicit. Federal agencies granting federal financial assistance are required to "establish and maintain an effective program of post-approval compliance reviews" of recipients to ensure that the recipients are complying with the requirements of Title VI. 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.407(a). Related to the reviews themselves, recipients should be required to submit periodic compliance reports to the agencies and, where appropriate, conduct field reviews of a representative number of major recipients. Finally, the Title VI Coordination Regulations recommend that agencies consider incorporating a Title VI component into general program reviews and audits. 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.407(c)(1).112 These Title VI requirements are applicable to Title IX as well.
Results of post-approval reviews by the federal agencies should be in writing and include specific findings of fact and recommendations. The determination by the federal agency of the recipient's compliance status shall be made as promptly as possible. 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.407(c).
The Title VI Coordination Regulations require that federal agencies establish procedures for the "prompt processing and disposition" of complaints of discrimination in federally funded programs. 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.408(a). Agency regulations with respect to procedures for the investigation of complaints of discriminatory practices, however, are typically brief, and lack details as to the manner or time table for such inquiry. See, e.g., 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.107; 32 C.F.R. ï½§ 195.8. Generally, by regulation, an agency will allow complainants 180 days to file a complaint, although the agency may exercise its discretion and accept a complaint filed later in time. See, e.g., 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.107(b). An agency is not obliged to investigate a complaint that is frivolous, has no apparent merit, or where other good cause is present, such as a pending law suit. An investigation customarily will include interviews of the complainant, the recipient's staff, and other witnesses; a review of the recipient's pertinent records, and consideration of the evidence gathered and defenses asserted. If the agency finds no violation after an investigation, it must notify, in writing, the recipient and the complainant, of this decision. See, e.g., 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.107(d)(2). If the agency believes there is adequate evidence to support a finding of noncompliance, the first course of action for the agency is to seek voluntary compliance by the recipient. See, e.g., 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.107(d)(1). If the agency concludes that the matter cannot be resolved through voluntary negotiations, the agency must make a formal finding of noncompliance and seek enforcement, either through judicial action or administrative fund suspension.
Where an agency receives a complaint about a recipient that is funded by more than one federal agency, the funding agency may avoid duplicative compliance and enforcement procedures by sharing or delegating compliance information and enforcement responsibilities. Section 1-207 of Executive Order 12250 authorizes the Attorney General to initiate cooperative programs and agreements between federal agencies to promote the effective enforcement of, inter alia, Title VI and IX. See also, 28 C.F.R. ï½§ï½§ 42.401-415.
Many agencies that fund entities that operate educational programs or activities have Title VI delegation agreements with the Department of Education (ED). However, only two of these agencies, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Environmental Protection Agency, have Title IX delegation agreements with ED. Delegation Agreements help to avoid duplicative enforcement efforts since they give to lead agencies responsibilities for conducting investigations when more than one agency has jurisdiction over a case. The Federal Coordination and Compliance Section of the Civil Rights Division is currently developing a comprehensive Title IX and Title VI interagency Delegation Agreement to include the remaining federal agencies that do not have Title IX delegation agreements.
Finally, the Title VI Coordination Regulations require that each federal agency, (and recipients that process Title VI complaints), maintain a log of complaints received. 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.408(d). The log shall include the following: the sex of the complainant, the identity of the recipient, the nature of the complaint, the date the complaint was filed, the investigation completed, the date and nature of the disposition, and other pertinent information.
Agency staff should remember that the primary means of enforcing compliance with Title IX is through voluntary agreements with the recipients, and that fund suspension or termination is a means of last resort.113 This approach is set forth in the statute, is a reflection of congressional intent, and is recognized by the courts. See 42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d-1; Board of Pub. Instruction of Taylor County, Fla. v. Finch, 414 F.2d 1068, 1075 n.11 (5th Cir. 1969) (citing 110 Cong. Rec. 7062 (1964) (Statement of Sen. Pastore)). Accordingly, if an agency believes an applicant is violating Title IX, the agency has three potential remedies:
(3) where voluntary compliance efforts are unsuccessful, referral of the violation to the Department of Justice for judicial action. 42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d-1. In addition, agencies may defer the decision whether to grant the assistance pending completion of a Title IX investigation, negotiations, or other action to obtain remedial relief.114
Compliance with any requirement adopted pursuant to this section may be effected (1) by the termination of or refusal to grant or to continue assistance under such program or activity to any recipient . . . or (2) by any other means authorized by law: Provided, however, that no such action shall be taken until the department or agency concerned . . . has determined that compliance cannot be secured by voluntary means.
42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d-1 (emphasis in original); see Alabama NAACP State Conference of Branches v. Wallace, 269 F. Supp. 346, 351 (M.D. Ala. 1967) (voluntary compliance is to be effectuated if possible). Both the Title VI Coordination Regulations and the Title VI Guidelines urge agencies to seek voluntary compliance before, and throughout, the administrative or judicial process.115 See 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.411(a) ("Effective enforcement of Title VI requires that agencies take prompt action to achieve voluntary compliance in all instances in which noncompliance is found."); 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 50.3 I.C.
Title VI requires that a concerted effort be made to persuade any noncomplying applicant or recipient voluntarily to comply with Title VI. Efforts to secure voluntary compliance should be undertaken at the outset in every noncompliance situation and should be pursued through each stage of enforcement action. Similarly, when an applicant fails to file an adequate assurance or apparently breaches its terms, notice should be promptly given of the nature of the noncompliance problem and of the possible consequences thereof, and an immediate effort made to secure voluntary compliance. Id.
An agency is not required to make formal findings of noncompliance with Title IX before undertaking negotiations or reaching a voluntary agreement to end alleged discriminatory practices. However, there must be a basis for an agency and recipient to enter into such a voluntary agreement (e.g., identification of alleged discriminatory practices, even if the parties do not agree as to the extent of such practices).116 In addition, throughout the negotiation process, agencies should be prepared with sufficient evidence to support administrative or judicial enforcement should voluntary negotiations fail.
An agency must balance its duty to permit informal resolution of findings of noncompliance against its duty to effectuate, without undue delay, the national policy prohibiting continued assistance to programs or activities which discriminate. Efforts to obtain voluntary compliance should continue throughout the process, but should not be allowed to become a device to avoid compliance.117 Once an area of noncompliance is identified, an agency is required to enforce Title IX.
As is done post-award, agencies may obtain compliance "by voluntary means" in the pre-award context by entering into an agreement with the applicant that enjoins the applicant from taking specified actions, requires that specified remedial actions be taken, and/or provides for other appropriate relief. The terms of the agreement become effective once the assistance is granted, and typically are attached as a special condition to the assistance agreement. Three issues arise by exercise of the voluntary compliance authority at the pre-award stage: what is the appropriate scope of special remedial conditions; what is the remedy if an applicant refuses to agree to a special condition proposed by an agency; and what is the remedy if, post-award, the recipient fails to comply with a special remedial condition of the assistance agreement.
When voluntary compliance is sought at the pre-award stage, agencies may exercise heightened flexibility in designing appropriate remedial conditions, for two reasons. First, if the pre-award remedy does not fully resolve the discrimination concern, agencies may have the opportunity to rectify this matter during the life of the assistance grant. Second, since a pre-award investigation and remedial efforts likely would require a deferral of the assistance award, it may be in the interest of the applicant (as well as potentially the agency) that interim measures be agreed to that allow the award to go forward while also addressing the discrimination concern. Thus, a pre-award special condition may grant provisional relief, require that certain aspects of the recipient's program be monitored, and/or require that the recipient provide additional information relating to the discrimination allegations. Of course, the mere fact that relief may be sought post-award does not necessarily mean that full relief, using voluntary means or otherwise, should not be sought pre-award.
Whether an agency may immediately suspend payment based on noncompliance with a previously imposed special remedial condition depends on the terms of the condition. As a general matter, if a recipient violates the terms of a special remedial condition, the noncompliance must be remedied in the same manner that any other post-award noncompliance is addressed -- through voluntary efforts, by the government filing suit, or by the agency suspending or terminating the assistance pursuant to the statutory procedure. If, however, as part of the remedial condition the applicant agrees that the agency immediately may suspend payment if noncompliance occurs, then that contractual provision would likely supersede the statutory protection against instant fund suspension that the recipient otherwise enjoys.
If an agency has evidence at the time of the award which does not rise to the level of an actual violation by an applicant, and thus does not warrant refusal of a grant award, the agency may consider notifying the recipient in the grant award letter that the agency has a civil rights concern. The statement could acknowledge, where appropriate, the applicant's cooperation with an ongoing civil rights investigation or its attempts to resolve the concern.118 By including this language, the applicant is on notice that there may be a potential problem and that the funding arm is aware of what the civil rights arm is doing. It also warns that a failure to cooperate could lead to a denial of funds. The language also may encourage the applicant to enter into voluntary compliance negotiations and engage in alternative dispute resolution, in appropriate cases, to resolve the alleged discrimination at issue without a formal finding or the completion of an investigation. A major advantage of this approach is that it avoids the due process concerns raised when deferral or special conditioning is utilized because, in this case, the funds are being awarded, i.e., there is no "refusal to grant," which would trigger the right to an administrative hearing.
(1) consulting with or seeking assistance from other Federal agencies . . . having authority to enforce nondiscrimination requirements; (2) consulting with or seeking assistance from State or local agencies having such authority; (3) bypassing a recalcitrant central agency applicant in order to obtain assurances from or to grant assistance to complying local agencies; and (4) bypassing all recalcitrant non-Federal agencies and providing assistance directly to the complying ultimate beneficiaries.
The Department of Justice's statutory authority to sue in federal district court on behalf of an agency for violation of Title VI (and, likewise, Title IX) is contained in the phrase "by any other means authorized by law." See 42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d-1; United States v. City and County of Denver, 927 F. Supp. 1396, 1400 (D. Colo. 1996); Ayers v. Allain, 674 F. Supp. 1523, 1551 n.6 (N.D. Miss. 1987); Marion County, 625 F.2d at 612-13 & n.14. In addition, the Department of Justice may pursue judicial enforcement through specific enforcement of assurances, certifications of compliance, covenants attached to property, desegregation or other plans submitted to the agency as conditions of assistance, or violations of other provisions of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, other statutes, or the Constitution. See Marion County, 625 F.2d at 612; 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 50.3 I.B.
Agency regulations interpreting this phrase provide for several options including: 1) referral to the Department of Justice for proceedings, 2) referrals to State agencies, and 3) referrals to local agencies. E.g., 29 C.F.R. ï½§ 31.8(a) (Labor); 34 C.F.R. ï½§ 100.8 (Education); and 45 C.F.R. ï½§ 80.8(a) (HHS):
[C]ompliance may be effected by . . . other means authorized by law. Such other means may include, but are not limited to, (1) a reference to the Department of Justice with a recommendation that appropriate proceedings be brought to enforce any rights of the United States under any law of the United States (including other titles of the Act), or any assurance or contractual undertaking and (2) any applicable proceedings under State or local law.
In order to refer a matter to the Justice Department for litigation, agency regulations require that the funding agency make a finding that a violation exists and a determination that voluntary compliance cannot be achieved. The recipient must be notified of its failure to comply and must be notified of the intended agency action to effectuate compliance.119 Some agency regulations require additional time after this notification to the recipient to continue negotiation efforts to achieve voluntary compliance.120 It should be noted that the funding agency must in fact formally initiate referral of the matter to the Justice Department, because there is no automatic referral mechanism.
4) the head of the agency must file a report with the House and Senate legislative committees having jurisdiction over the programs involved and wait 30 days before terminating funds.121 The report must provide the grounds for the decision to deny or terminate the funds to the recipient or applicant. 42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d-1; 20 U.S.C. ï½§ 1682; See, e.g., 45 C.F.R. ï½§ 80.8(c) (HHS).
As noted above, funds may not be terminated without providing the recipient an opportunity for a formal hearing. See, e.g., 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.109(a). If the recipient waives this right, a decision will be issued by the "responsible Department official" based on the record compiled by the investigative agency. Hearings on terminations cannot be held less than 20 days after receipt of notice of the violation. See, e.g., 45 C.F.R. ï½§ 80.9(a) (HHS).
Agencies have adopted the procedures of the Administrative Procedures Act for administrative hearings. See, e.g., 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.109(d) (Justice); 45 C.F.R. ï½§ 80.9 (HHS). Technical rules of evidence do not apply, although the hearing examiner may exclude evidence that is "irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious." See, e.g., 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.109(d); 45 C.F.R. ï½§ 80.9(d)(2)(HHS). The hearing examiner may issue an initial decision or a recommendation to the "responsible agency official." See, e.g., 28 C.F.R. 42.110. The recipient may file exceptions to any initial decision. In the absence of exceptions or review initiated by the "responsible department official," the hearing examiner's decision will be the final decision. A final decision that suspends or terminates funds, or imposes other sanctions, is subject to review and approval by the agency head. Upon approval, an order shall be issued that identifies the basis for noncompliance, and the action(s) that must be taken in order to come into compliance. A recipient may request restoration of funds upon a showing of compliance with the terms of the order, or if the recipient is otherwise able to show compliance with Title VI or Title IX. See, e.g., 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.110; 45 C.F.R. ï½§ 80.10(g). The restoration of funds is subject to judicial review. 42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d-2; 20 U.S.C. ï½§ 1682. Moreover, as noted above, no funds may be terminated until 30 days after the agency head files a written report on the matter with the House and Senate committees having legislative jurisdiction over the program or activity involved. 42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d-1; 20 U.S.C. ï½§ 1682.
...shall be limited to the particular political entity, or part thereof, or other recipient as to whom such a finding has been made and, shall be limited in its effect to the particular program, or part thereof, in which such noncompliance has been so found, . . . .
42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d-1; 20 U.S.C. ï½§ 1682. This is called the "pinpoint provision." As discussed below, the CRRA did not modify interpretations of this provision, but affected only the interpretation of "program or activity" for purposes of coverage of Title IX (and related statutes). See S. Rep. No. 64 at 20, reprinted in 1988 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 22.
Congress' intent was to limit the adverse effects of fund termination on innocent beneficiaries and to insure against the vindictive or punitive use of the fund termination remedy. Finch, 414 F.2d at 1075.122 "The procedural limitations placed on the exercise of such power were designed to insure that termination would be 'pinpoint(ed) . . . to the situation where discriminatory practices prevail.'" Id.(quoting 1964 U.S.C.C.A.N. 2512).
The seminal case on this issue is Finch, 414 F.2d 1068. A Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW) hearing officer had found that the school district had made inadequate progress toward student and teacher desegregation and that the district had sought to perpetuate the dual school system through its construction program. Based on these findings, a final order was entered terminating "any class of Federal financial assistance" to the district "arising under any Act of Congress" administered by HEW, the National Science Foundation, and the Department of the Interior. Id. at 1071.
On appeal, the Fifth Circuit vacated the termination order, holding that it was in violation of the purpose and statutory scope of the agency's power. The "programs" in issue were three education statutes, yet the HEW officer had not made any specific findings as to whether there was discrimination in all three programs, and/or if action in one program tainted, or caused discriminatory treatment in, other programs. Id. at 1073-74, 79. The court paid considerable attention to the congressional intent of the pinpoint provision: limiting the termination power to "activities which are actually discriminatory or segregated" was designed to protect the innocent beneficiaries of untainted programs. Id. at 1077. The court further held that it was improper to construe Section 602 as placing the burden on recipients to limit the effect of termination orders by proving that certain programs are untainted by discrimination, rather than on an agency to establish the basis for findings as to the scope of discrimination. Id.
As to the meaning of the term "program" in the pinpoint proviso, the court concluded that the legislative history of Title VI evidenced a congressional intent that the term refer not to generic categories of programs by a recipient, but rather to specific programs of assistance, or specific statutes, administered by the federal government. Id. at 1077-78.123 Further, even if "program" was meant to refer to generic categories of aid, the parenthetical phrase, "or part thereof", must be given meaning. Thus, an agency's fund termination order must be based on program-specific (i.e., grant statute specific) findings of noncompliance. The Court reasoned that:
[T]he purpose of the Title VI [fund] cutoff is best effectuated by separate consideration of the use or intended use of federal funds under each grant statute. If the funds provided by the grant are administered in a discriminatory manner, or if they support a program which is infected by a discriminatory environment, then termination of such funds is proper. But there will also be cases from time to time where a particular program, within a state, within a county, within a district, even within a school (in short, within a "political entity or part thereof"), is effectively insulated from otherwise unlawful activities. Congress did not intend that such a program suffer for the sins of others. HEW was denied the right to condemn programs by association. The statute prescribes a policy of disassociation of programs in the fact finding process. Each must be considered on its own merits to determine whether or not it is in compliance with the Act. In this way the Act is shielded from a vindictive application. Schools and programs are not condemned enmasse or in gross, with the good and the bad condemned together, but the termination power reaches only those programs which would utilize federal money for unconstitutional ends.
The specificity required for fund termination was also addressed by the Seventh Circuit in Gautreaux v. Romney, 457 F.2d 124 (7th Cir. 1972). In Gautreaux, the court reversed a district court's order approving federal fund termination for a Housing and Urban Development (HUD) program where there were no findings of discrimination in such program, and where such action was pursued in an effort to pressure action to remedy the defendant's discriminatory conduct in a wholly separate HUD program. Id. at 127-128. The district court had previously found that defendants had violated fair housing laws yet intended to withhold Model Cities Program funds, which primarily support education, job training, and day care programs on behalf of low and moderate income families. Although a small portion of Model Cities money also supported public housing, there was no allegation or finding that any Model Cities program was operated in a discriminatory fashion. Id. at 126-27. Accordingly, the court of appeals held that the district court violated Section 602 of Title VI and the "mandate of" Finch, and abused its discretion in withholding the Model Cities funds. Id. at 128.
It is equally critical to note that, notwithstanding the need for an independent evaluation of each program, an agency (or reviewing court) must examine not only whether the Federal funds are "administered in a discriminatory manner, . . . [but also] if they support a program which is infected by a discriminatory environment." Finch, 414 F.2d 1068, 1078-79 (emphasis added). Not all programs operate in isolation. Thus,
the administrative agency seeking to cut off federal funds must make findings of fact indicating either that a particular program is itself administered in a discriminatory manner, or is so affected by discriminatory practices elsewhere in the [overall operation, e.g., school system] that it thereby becomes discriminatory.
Id. at 1079; see North Haven, 456 U.S. at 539 (approval of HEW Title IX regulations that adopt the Finch "infection" standard.) This latter analysis is often referred to as the "infection theory." Although Finch and Gautreaux were decided prior to passage of the CRRA, it is important to recognize that while the CRRA defined the meaning of "program or activity" for purposes of prohibited conduct, it did not change the definition of such terms for purposes of fund termination for a violation of Title IX. In particular, the CRRA left intact the "pinpoint" provision that limits any fund termination to the "program, or part thereof, in which noncompliance has been so found." 42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d-1.
The most common form of relief sought and obtained through a private right of action is an injunction ordering a recipient to do something. See Cannon, 441 U.S. 667. See also, United States v. Baylor Univ. Med. Ctr., 736 F.2d at 1050, in which the Fifth Circuit held that a court can order termination of federal financial assistance as a remedy. The Supreme Court also has held that individuals may obtain monetary damages for claims of intentional discrimination under Title IX. See Franklin, 503 U.S. at 75 n.8. As discussed below, agencies are encouraged to identify and seek the full complement of relief for complainants and identified victims, where appropriate, as part of voluntary settlements, including, where appropriate, not only the obvious remedy of back pay for certain employment discrimination cases, but also compensatory damages for violations in a nonemployment context. Agencies are also asked to recommend the scope of relief to be sought in referrals of matters to the Department of Justice for judicial enforcement.
Franklin contains a detailed discussion on the merits of allowing monetary damages for intentional violations of Title IX. Id. at 71-76. The Court placed great reliance on the "longstanding rule" that where a federal statute provides (expressly or impliedly) for a right to bring suit, federal courts "presume the availability of all appropriate remedies unless Congress has expressly indicated otherwise." Id. at 66.127 The Court found no congressional intent to abandon this presumption in the enforcement of Title IX.128 Accordingly, the Court concluded that private individuals may obtain damages in appropriate cases.
Throughout its opinion, the Franklin Court broadly referred to the relief being sanctioned as "monetary damages." Although the Court did not define this term, it specifically rejected limiting Title IX plaintiffs to monetary relief that is equitable in nature, such as backpay. See Id. at 75-76.
In Franklin, the Supreme Court was not called upon to rule whether monetary damages are available where other types of discrimination are proven. Nonetheless, the Court noted that unintentional discrimination may present a different legal question, and damages may not be available. Id. at 74.129 Awarding damages may be particularly problematic where the violation rests on a "disparate impact" theory of discrimination. See Guardians, 463 U.S. at 595-603 (Opinions of White, J.).
In incorporating the damages remedy into agency compliance activities, agencies will need to decide when damages should be sought as part of a voluntary compliance agreement and, if damages, are requested, the amount of emphasis to be placed on the damages request in compliance negotiations. Agencies will want to ensure that the damages remedy is implemented in a manner consistent with other enforcement goals and policies, in a manner consistent among compliance agreements, and in a manner that protects the flexibility of the voluntary compliance process. To effectuate these goals, agencies may wish to draft written guidelines, and establish special supervisory procedures and internal reporting requirements.
There are several considerations that may be relevant in deciding how to exercise administrative discretion in applying the damages remedy in particular cases. One factor may be the degree of seriousness of the violation. A second factor may be whether the injury is substantial. A third factor may be whether the injury is pecuniary in nature. Since pecuniary losses represent a concrete injury and are relatively straightforward to measure, they may represent a type of loss for which damages almost always should be sought. Injuries involving "emotional distress" also should be addressed, but may require closer analysis. A fourth factor may be whether the discrimination victim has a current, ongoing relationship with the recipient that involves regular interactions between the two. If such a relationship exists and prospective relief is obtained that benefits the victim, that may weigh against providing compensation for any nonpecuniary injury that is relatively slight.
Another issue is how agencies should respond to requests by recipients that discrimination victims sign a liability release in order to obtain a damages award through a compliance agreement. As a practical matter, agencies likely will need to be open to including such a release in any agreement that provides for damages, if requested by the recipient.
(1) A state shall not be immune under the Eleventh Amendment of the Constitution of the United States from suit in Federal court for a violation of section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 [29 U.S.C.A. ï½§794, title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 [20 U.S.C.A. ï½§1681 et seq.], the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 [42 U.S.C.A. ï½§6101 et seq.], title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 [42 U.S.C.A. ï½§2000d et seq.], or the provisions of any other Federal statute prohibiting discrimination by recipients of Federal financial assistance.
(2) In a suit against a State for a violation of a statute referred to in paragraph (1), remedies (including remedies both at law and in equity) are available for such a violation to the same extent as such remedies are available for such a violation in the suit against any public or private entity other than a State.
The Department of Justice has two roles to play in Title IX enforcement: coordination of federal agency implementation and enforcement, and legal representation of the United States and the funding agency. Pursuant to Exec. Order No. 12250, the Attorney General shall "coordinate the implementation and enforcement by Executive agencies" of Title VI, Title IX, Section 504 and "any other provision of federal statutory law which provides, in whole or in part, that no person in the United States shall, on the ground of race, color, national origin, handicap, religion, or sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subject to discrimination under any program or activity receiving federal financial assistance." Exec. Order No. 12250 ï½§1-201. Except for approval of agency regulations implementing Title IX and Title VI and the issuance of coordinating regulations, all other responsibilities have been delegated to the Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights. While each federal agency extending federal financial assistance has primary responsibility for implementing Title IX with respect to its recipients, overall coordination in identifying legal and operational standards, and ensuring consistent application and enforcement, rests with the Civil Rights Division of the Department of Justice. In interpreting Title IX, the Department will look closely at, and coordinate and consult with, the Department of Education, the agency with the most Title IX experience and the agency with the regulations that served as the basis for the Title IX common rule.
4 In implementing this provision, the Department of Education requires a single-sex school for both sexes once it is provided for one sex. The Department of Education is currently reviewing provisions in its current Title IX regulations regarding single-sex programs to determine whether revised standards or further guidance on this issue may be appropriate.
6 As enacted in Title IX, this provision provides: (b) Nothing contained in subsection (a) of this section shall be interpreted to require any educational institutional to grant preferential or disparate treatment to members of one sex on account of an imbalance which may exist with respect to the total number or percentage of persons of that sex participating in or receiving the benefits of any federally supported program or activity, in comparison with the total number or percentage of persons of that sex in any community, State, section, or other areas: Provided, that this subsection shall not be construed to prevent the consideration in any hearing or proceeding under this title of statistical evidence tending to show that such an imbalance exists with respect to the participation in, or receipt of the benefits of, any such program or activity by the members of one sex. 20 U.S.C. ï½§1681(b).
7 The Javitz Amendment was a compromise bill passed after congress rejected the Tower Amendment, an earlier proposal to either completely exclude intercollegiate athletics from Title IX or to exclude revenue-generating athletic programs. Pub. L. 93- 380, 88 Stat. 612 (1974). The HEW regulations are codified at 34 C.F.R. Part 106.
12 In Delmonte, the plaintiff alleged that he was demoted in 1990 on a prohibited basis in violation of Section 504. 877 F. Supp. at 1564. The court held that the defendant received federal financial assistance through its participation in at least 10 federal training programs (consisting of less than one to three-day programs) both before and after the demotion, over a course of approximately twelve years. Id. at 1565-66. The court does not clearly address whether its conclusion was based on training in the aggregate, or if a single training session (with the required contractual assurances of compliance with nondiscrimination), is sufficient. Id. at 1566.
13 Under the Title IX common rule, each federal agency that awards financial assistance is required to publish in the Federal Register a notice of the programs covered by Title IX. 65 Fed. Reg. 52874 ï½§ .600 (2000) .
14 It is often difficult to separate discussions of closely linked concepts, such as what is a recipient and what is federal financial assistance. Accordingly, the concept of "direct" and "indirect" are discussed both in terms of "direct/indirect recipient" and "directly receive/indirectly receive federal financial assistance."
15 "With the benefit of clear statutory language, powerful evidence of Congress' intent, and a longstanding and coherent administrative construction of the phrase 'receiving federal financial assistance,' we have little trouble concluding that Title IX coverage is not foreclosed because federal funds are granted to Grove City's students rather than directly to one of the College's educational programs." Id. at 569.
Activities wholly carried out by the United States with Federal funds, such as river and harbor improvements or other public works, defense installations, veteran's hospitals, mail service, etc. are not included in the list [of federally assisted programs]. Such activities, being wholly owned by, and operated by or for, the United States, cannot fairly be described as receiving Federal 'assistance.' While they may result in general economic benefit to neighboring communities, such benefit is not considered to be financial assistance to a program or activity within the meaning of Title VI.
17 The court in Bob Jones Univ. distinguished pensions from payments to veterans for educational purposes since the latter is a program with a requirement or condition that the individual participate in a program or activity. 396 F. Supp. at 602 n.16. For a more detailed discussion of when assistance to a beneficiary may constitute indirect assistance to a recipient, see discussion of indirect recipient in section (B)(3) of this Chapter.
20It should be noted that the remaining text of this section distinguishes various scenarios for recipients and beneficiaries. While captions are used to separate different circumstances, courts do not uniformly use the same phrase to explain the same funding pattern. Thus, a court may refer to an "indirect recipient" when the situation more closely fits the paradigm of "primary recipient/subrecipient," as described in Section E of this chapter.
21 While the court's analysis in Grove City of the scope of "program or activity" was reversed by the Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987, Pub. L. No. 100-259, 102 Stat. 28 (1988), the Court's discussion of other principles, including direct and indirect recipients, remains undisturbed.
24The Graves court described the local agency as an "indirect" recipient since the federal money flowed "through another recipient," and compared this situation to Grove City College's indirect receipt of BEOG funds from students. Id. at 433. Given that the funding was distributed to a State agency and a portion allocated to a local entity, the more accurate description is that of primary/subrecipient.
25 It should be remembered that federal assistance may include, not only, the payment of money to an ultimate beneficiary, but also the provision of subsidized services, e.g. job training, elementary and secondary education, prison job skills programs, etc.
26 Title IX broadly defines the term "educational institution" to include "any public or private preschool, elementary, or secondary school, or any institution of vocational, professional, or higher education..." 20 U.S.C. ï½§ 1681.
An education recipient has a different scope of coverage depending upon whether the entity receiving federal funds has education as a primary purpose. If the recipient does have education as its primary purpose, such as colleges, universities, school districts, training institutes, and academies, then the federal funds result in institution-wide coverage. If the entity receiving federal funds does not have education as a primary purpose yet engages in educational functions, then all of its education-related functions are covered. For this entity, its other functions are not necessarily covered unless there is a link between the education function and the non-education functions.
29Gebser v. Lago Vista Indep. Sch. Dist., 524 U.S. 274, 286 (1998); Grove City College v. Bell , 465 U.S. 555, 566 (1984); Cannon v. University of Chicago , 441 U.S. 677, 684-85 (1979); Cohen v. Brown Univ., 101 F.3d 155, 170 (1st Cir. 1996), cert denied, 520 U.S. 1186 (1997); Yusuf v. Vassar College, 35 F.3d 709, 714 (2 nd Cir. 1994). Indeed, one of the earlier legislative proposals of what ultimately became Title IX sought to amend Title VI itself by adding sex as one of its prohibited bases of discrimination. See North Haven , 456 U.S. at 546 (Powell, J., dissenting).
31U.S. Const., Art. I, ï½§8, cl. 1. See Davis v. Monroe County Bd. of Educ., 526 U.S. 629, 640 (1999); Gebser v. Lago Vista Indep. Sch. Dist., 524 U.S. 274, 287 (1998); Smith v. Metropolitan Sch. Dist., Perry Township, 128 F.3d 1014, 1028 (7th Cir. 1997), cert. denied, 524 U.S. 951 (1988).
35Elston v. Talladega County Bd. of Educ., 997 F.2d 1394, 1406 (11 th Cir. 1993), rehearing denied, 7 F.3d 242 (11 th Cir. 1993), cert. denied, 502 U.S. 910 (1991), (quoting Williams v. City of Dothan, 745 F.2d 1406, 1414 (11 th Cir. 1984)).
36 See, e.g., Mississippi Univ. for Women v. Hogan, 458 U.S. 718, 726-730 (1982) (maintenance of single sex nursing school as compensation for assumed prior discrimination rejected as perpetuating sex stereotypes); United States v. Virginia, 518 U.S. 515, 534-46 (1996) (benign justification in defense of a categorical exclusion does not block inquiries into actual purposes of and factual support for the exclusion). It should be noted that both of these cases are Constitutional cases, not Title IX cases.
37 See Village of Arlington Heights v. Metro. Hous. Redevelopment Corp., 429 U.S. 252, 266-68 (1977)(evaluation of intentional discrimination claim under the Fourteenth Amendment); Elston, 997 F.2d at 1406.
46 Disparate impact is also referred to as "disproportionate impact" or "adverse impact." Regardless of the descriptive phrase used, all refer to the process of evaluating facially neutral policies or practices that in fact result in the burdens of a policy or practice being borne more heavily by members of one sex(or race or national origin) than another.
66 Elston, 997 F.2d at 1407; see also Young by and through Young, 922 F.Supp at 551 (goals of addressing illegal recruiting and improving quality of schools were substantial legitimate justifications for policy imposing loss of athletic eligibility after interschool transfer, and plaintiffs failed to demonstrate existence of an equally effective alternative practice).
67 See, e.g., Preston v. Com. Of Va. ex rel. New River Community College, 31 F.3d 203, 205-06 n. 2 (4 th Cir. 1994); Nelson v. University of Maine System, 923 F.Supp 275, 279-80 (D.Me. 1996); Clay v. Board of Trustees of Neosho Community College, 905 F.Supp. 1488, 1495 (D.Kan. 1995).
69 See, e.g., Benson v. Little Rock Hilton Inn, 742 F.2d 414, 416-17 (8 th Cir. 1984) (discussing remedial purpose of retaliation complaints and irrelevance of merits of underlying discrimination claim).
74 This is not to say that the employment practices of a recipient of non-employment related assistance will always be beyond the reach of Title VI. Where such employment discrimination so infects the tone and tenor of a program or activity that it subjects beneficiaries to an oppressive discriminatory atmosphere, enforcement action under Title VI is authorized. See, e.g., 28 C.F.R. ï½§42.104(c)(2) (DOJ Title VI Regulations); 15 C.F.R. ï½§8.4(c)(2) (Commerce Title VI Regulations); 34 C.F.R. ï½§100.3(c)(2) (Education Title VI Regulations). See also, Ahern v. Board of Educ. of the City of Chicago, 133 F.3d 975 (7 th Cir. 1998); United States v. Jefferson County Bd. of Educ., 372 F.2d 836, 883 (5 th Cir. 1966), cert. denied, 389 U.S. 840 (1967).
76 Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Sex in Education Programs or Activities Receiving Federal Financial Assistance (hereinafter referred to as "the Title IX common rule"), 65 Fed. Reg. 52858 (August 30, 2000), ï½§ _.500(a).
77 Johnson v. Baptist Med. Ctr., 97 F.3d 1070, 1072 (8 th Cir. 1996), rehearing denied, 114 F.3d 189 (8 th Cir. 1997). See also Kinman v. Omaha Pub. Sch. Dist., 94 F.3d 463, 469 (8 th Cir. 1996); Brine v. University of Iowa, 90 F.3d 271, 276 (8 th Cir. 1996), cert. denied, 519 U.S. 1149, 117 S.Ct. 1082; Doe v. Oyster River Co-Op Sch. Dist., 992 F.Supp. 467, 474 (D.N.H. 1997) (reference to Title VII provides helpful guidance). But see Chance v. Rice Univ., 984 F.2d 151 (5 th Cir. 1993), rehearing denied, 989 F.2d 179 (5 TH Cir. 1993) (claim of discrimination properly reviewed under the intentional discrimination standard of Title VI rather than the standards under Title VII).
78 29 C.F.R. ï½§1691.4. This provision is part of general regulations adopted jointly by the Department of Justice and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission governing the handling of employment discrimination complaints received by federal funding agencies. Those general regulations are discussed more fully in subsection B.6 of this Chapter.
79 It is important to note, however, that Title VII case law does not apply with equal symmetry in the area of harassment claims. For a discussion of Title IX harassment claims, see section D of this Chapter.
82 See "Procedures for Complaints of Employment Discrimination Filed Against Recipients of Federal financial assistance." 28 C.F.R. ï½§ï½§ 42.601-42.613 (DOJ); 29 C.F.R. ï½§ï½§ 1691.1 - 1691.13 (EEOC).
90 The phrase "special circumstances" is used throughout the Joint Complaint Procedures. In using this phrase, the Joint Complaint Procedures seek to recognize the need for administrative flexibility in processing complaints. For example, an agency might conclude that special circumstances argue in favor of retaining a complaint that ordinarily should be referred to the EEOC where the complaint was related to or in furtherance of a pending investigation of the same recipient.
93 The following agencies also have Title IX regulations with similar requirements: The Department of Agriculture, 7 C.F.R. part 15a; the Department of Energy, 10 C.F.R part 1040; and the Department of Health and Human Services, 45 C.F.R. part 86.
99 The Title VI Guidelines distinguish between the applicability of an agency's deferral authority for initial or one-time awards versus continuing, periodic awards. The Title VI Guidelines state that agencies have deferral authority with regard to "applications for one-time or noncontinuing assistance and initial applications for new or existing programs of continuing assistance." 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 50.3 II.A. In contrast, if an application for funds has been approved and a recipient is entitled to "future, periodic payments," or if "assistance is given without formal application pursuant to statutory direction or authorization," distribution of funds may not be deferred or withheld unless all the Title VI statutory procedures for a termination of funds are followed. Id. II.B.
The Title VI Guidelines do not specify what may constitute "abnormal" or exceptional circumstances to warrant deferral of a continuing grant. In these renewal or continuation situations, the Title VI Guidelines indicate that an assurance of compliance or a nondiscrimination plan may be required prior to continuing the payout of funds.
100 Subsequent to the adoption of Title VI, Congress on at least two occasions has refused to prohibit agencies from exercising pre-award deferral authority. In 1966, in considering the Elementary and Secondary Education Amendments of 1966, the House adopted a provision that effectively would have prohibited pre-award deferrals of certain education grants by the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. The amendment, offered by Representative Fountain, provided that no deferral could occur unless and until there was a formal finding, after opportunity for hearing, that the applicant was violating Title VI. 112 Cong. Rec. 25,573 (1966). Representative Fountain argued that a deferral was the same as a refusal, and accordingly that deferrals should be subject to the same hearing procedure required to refuse or terminate assistance. Id. at 25,573-74. In opposition, Representative Celler argued that the amendment would preclude HEW from obtaining pre-award relief since the award procedure would be completed before the Title VI hearing could be held. Id. at 25,575. During the debate, Rep. Celler noted that HEW was acting pursuant to the directives set out in the Title VI Guidelines. Id. The Senate version did not include any limitation on deferrals. In conference, the prohibition was deleted and replaced with a durational/procedural limitation on certain HEW deferrals. Conf. Rep. No. 2309, 89th Cong., 2d Sess. (1966), reprinted in 1966 U.S.C.C.A.N. 3896. Codified at 42 U.S.C. ï½§ 2000d-5. Again in 1976, in adopting the Education Amendments of 1976, Congress imposed a durational/procedural limitation on HEW deferral authority, codified at 20 U.S.C. 1232i(b), but rejected a House passed amendment effectively prohibiting specified HEW deferrals. 122 Cong. Rec. 13411-13416; H.R. Conf. Rep. No. 1701, 94th Cong., 1st Sess. 242-43 (1976), reprinted in 1976 U.S.C.C.A.N. 4943-44. This post-adoption legislative history buttresses the conclusion that deferrals are an appropriate application of the pre-award remedial authority granted agencies by Congress. See Board of Pub. Instruction of Palm Beach County, Fla. v. Cohen, 413 F.2d 1201 (5th Cir. 1969).
101 The Title VI Guidelines note that deferral may be more appropriate where it will be difficult during the life of the grant to obtain compliance, e.g., where the application is for noncontinuing assistance. On the other hand, deferral may be less appropriate where full compliance may be achieved during the life of the grant, e.g., where the application is for a program of continuing assistance. Where the grant of assistance is not deferred despite a concern about noncompliance, the Title VI Guidelines advise that
the applicant should be given prompt notice of the asserted noncompliance; funds should be paid out for short periods only, with no long-term commitment of assistance given; and the applicant advised that acceptance of the funds carries an enforceable obligation of nondiscrimination and the risk of invocation of severe sanctions, if noncompliance in fact is found. Id. II.A.2.
106 Post-award reviews may be limited to a "desk audit," i.e., a review of documentation submitted by the recipient, or may involve an on-site review. In either case, an agency will demand the production of or access to records, and this discussion addresses the limits on an agency's demand for such records.
110 As mentioned above, it is assumed that the first two factors can be established. First, that the access provision is an appropriate exercise of agency authority to issue regulations consistent with the statute. Second, it is assumed that any data sought will be relevant to an evaluation of whether the recipient's employment practices or delivery of services are discriminatory.
112 "All Federal staff determinations of Title VI, (as well as Title IX) compliance shall be made by, or be subject to the review of, the agency's civil rights office." 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.407(a). Where regional or area offices of federal agencies have responsibility for approving applications or specific projects, the agency shall "include personnel having Title VI review responsibility on the staffs" of these offices. These personnel will conduct the post-approval compliance reviews. Id.
In this era of downsizing, it is understood that not all field offices will have Title IX staff. This element of review, however, should be conducted and reviewed by experienced Title IX personnel, whether as a full time or collateral duty, and whether or not as members of the office in issue.
115 Agencies are strongly encouraged to make use of alternative dispute resolution (ADR), whenever appropriate. Both the President and the Attorney General have encouraged the use of alternative dispute resolution in matters that are the subject of civil litigation. See Executive Order 12988 and Attorney General Order OBD 1160.1. The Administrative Dispute Resolution Act of 1996 authorizes the use of ADR to resolve administrative disputes. 5 U.S.C. ï½§ 571 et seq.). ADR can consist of anything from the use of a neutral third party or mediator to informally resolving a matter without completing a full investigation.
117 Although Title VI (and, thus, Title IX), do not provide a specific limit to the time period within which voluntary compliance may be sought, it is clear that a request for voluntary compliance, if not followed by responsive action on the part of the institution within a reasonable time, does not relieve the agency of the responsibility to enforce Title IX by one of the two alternative means contemplated by the statute. A consistent failure to do so is a dereliction of duty reviewable in the courts. 28 C.F.R. ï½§ 42.411(b).
In reviewing an application for funding, we consider whether the applicant is in compliance with federal civil rights laws. A determination of noncompliance could lead to a denial of assistance or an award conditioned on remedial action being taken. We are aware that the Department's Civil Rights Division is conducting an investigation involving possible civil rights violations. The Civil Rights Division has advised us that your agency is cooperating with its investigation, and we have taken that into account in deciding to approve your grant application.
121 The congressional intent behind the 30 day requirement was to include seemingly neutral third parties, (the relevant Congressional committees), to ensure that the decision to terminate funds was fair, reasoned, and not arbitrary. See 110 Cong. Rec. 2498 (1964) (Statement of Cong. Willis); 110 Cong. Rec. 7059 (1964) (Statement of Sen. Pastore).
122 Much of the legislative debate on Title VI centered on the potential scope of any termination of assistance due to a failure to comply with the rules effectuating Section 601. The Dirksen-Mansfield substitute bill, which was developed through informal, bipartisan conferences, sought to answer those concerns. For a listing and explanation of specific changes made by the substitute see, 110 Cong. Rec. 12817-12820 (1964) (Report of Senator Dirksen). Senator Humphrey explained the purpose behind the substitute language.
Some Senators have expressed the fear that in its original form Title VI would authorize cutting off of all federal funds going to a state for a particular program even though only part of the state were guilty of racial discrimination in that program. And some Senators have feared that the title would authorize canceling all federal assistance to a state if it were discriminating in any of the federally-assisted programs in that State.
As was explained a number of times on the floor of the Senate, these interpretations of Title VI are inaccurate. The title is designed to limit any termination of federal assistance to the particular offenders in the particular area where the unlawful discrimination occurs. Since this was our intention, we have made this specific in the provisions of Title VI by adding language to 602 to spell out these limitations more precisely. This language provides that any termination of federal assistance will be restricted to the particular political subdivision which is violating non-discriminatory regulations established under Title VI. It further provides that the termination shall affect only the particular program, or part thereof, in which such a violation is taking place.
Proponents of the bill have continually made it clear that it is the intent of Title VI not to require wholesale cutoffs of Federal [f]unds from all Federal programs in entire States, but instead to require a careful case-by-case application of the principle of nondiscrimination to those particular activities which are actually discriminatory or segregated.
126 In this case, plaintiffs brought suit to enjoin the Department of Education from allowing recipients of its funds to offer certain federally funded scholarships exclusively to minorities. 983 F.2d at 486.
127 The Court further stated, "absent clear direction to the contrary by Congress, the federal courts have the power to award any appropriate relief in a cognizable cause of action brought pursuant to a federal statute." Id. at 70-71.
130 U.S. Const. Amend XI states: "The judicial power of the United States shall not be construed to extend to any suit in law or equity, commenced or prosecuted against one of the United States by Citizens of another State, or by Citizens or subjects of any Foreign State." See Hans v. Louisiana, 134 U.S. 1, 11 (1890).
131 The participating agencies include: the Nuclear Regulatory Commission; Small Business Administration; National Aeronautics and Space Administration; Department of Commerce; Department of Labor; Tennessee Valley Authority; Department of State; Agency for International Development; Department of Housing and Urban Development; Department of Justice; Department of Labor; Department of the Treasury; Department of Defense; National Archives and Records Administration; Department of Veterans Affairs; Environmental Protection Agency; General Services Administration; Department of the Interior; Federal Emergency Management Agency; National Science Foundation; Corporation for National and Community Service; and, the Department of Transportation.
132 See 64 Fed. Reg. 58567 (1999). Three agencies that participated in the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, the National Endowment for the Arts, the National Endowment for the Humanities, and the Institute of Museum and Library Services are promulgating separate Title IX regulations, rather than participate in the final Title IX common rule.
Honesty and Integrity. Our employees adhere to the highest standards of ethical behavior, mindful that, as public servants, we must work to earn the trust of, and inspire confidence in, the public we serve.
Press ReleaseHawaii Woman Charged with Filing False Tax ReturnsA federal grand jury in Honolulu returned an indictment yesterday charging a Hawaii woman with filing false tax returns, wire fraud, money laundering and structuring related to her...
Press ReleaseJustice Department and City of Albuquerque Seek Partial Termination of Consent Decree Covering the Albuquerque Police DepartmentThe Justice Department and the city of Albuquerque filed a joint motion today seeking court approval to terminate certain portions of the consent decree covering the Albuquerque Police...
Press ReleaseReadout of the Tribal Nations Leadership Council MeetingThe Justice Department hosted a two-day conference of the Tribal Nations Leadership Council (TNLC), where Council members met with Attorney General Merrick B. Garland and officials from across...
Press ReleaseAttorney General Merrick B. Garland Statement on Lewiston, Maine, Mass ShootingThe Justice Department issued the following statement from Attorney General Merrick B. Garland on the mass shooting in Lewiston, Maine:
Press ReleaseConstruction Firm CFO Sentenced to Two Years in Prison for Employment Tax CrimeA Louisiana man was sentenced today to 24 months in prison for willfully failing to report and pay over the IRS employment taxes withheld from employees’ paychecks.
Kristen Clarke is the Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights at the U.S. Department of Justice. In this role, she leads the Justice Department’s broad federal civil rights enforcement efforts and works to uphold the civil and constitutional rights of all who live in America. Assistant Attorney General Clarke is a lifelong civil rights lawyer who has spent her entire career in public service.
Assistant Attorney General Clarke began her career as a trial attorney in the Civil Rights Division through the Department of Justice’s Honors Program. In 2006, she joined the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, where she helped lead the organization’s work in the areas of voting rights and election law across the country. Ms. Clarke worked on cases defending the constitutionality of the Voting Rights Act, presented oral argument to the D.C. District Court in Shelby County, Alabama v. Holder, and has provided testimony on federal and state voting rights legislation. In 2011, she was named the head of the Civil Rights Bureau for the New York State Attorney General’s Office, where she led broad civil rights enforcement actions. Under her leadership, the Bureau secured landmark agreements with banks to address unlawful redlining, employers to address barriers to reentry for people with criminal backgrounds, police departments on reforms to policies and practices, major retailers on racial profiling of consumers, landlords on discriminatory housing policies, school districts concerning issues relating to the school-to-prison pipeline and more. In 2015, Ms. Clarke was named the president and executive director of the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, one of the nation’s leading civil rights organizations founded at the request of John F. Kennedy. There, she led the organization’s legal work in courts across the country addressing some of the nation’s most complex racial justice and civil rights challenges.
Assistant Attorney General Kristen Clarke Delivers Remarks on Significant Milestone in Combating Redlining Initiative After Securing Over $107 Million in Relief for Communities of Color NationwideOctober 19, 2023
Assistant Attorney General Kristen Clarke Delivers Remarks on the Commission on the Social Status of Black Men and Boys and the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation Annual Legislative ConferenceSeptember 22, 2023
In compliance with the 1996 Electronic Freedom of Information Act, the Civil Rights Division FOIA Branch has selected these records as containing subject matter that has become or is likely to become the subject of periodic or repeated FOIA requests.
The Civil Rights Division (CRT) conducts the litigation of cases to secure equal opportunity in the areas of employment, education, housing, voting, public accommodations and facilities, and Federally assisted programs. CRT is also responsible for enforcing the antidiscrimination provision of the Immigration Reform and Control Act through the investigation and prosecution of charges filed on the basis of citizenship status or national origin. It also prosecutes criminal violations of Federal civil rights statutes. The Division maintains records of all its legal cases, correspondence, and memoranda, as well as records on certain individuals protected under civil rights statutes. Records maintained include those relating to the administration of the office.
Throughout the entire history of the CRT FOI/PA Branch, CRT has never used an exclusion in responding to a FOIA request, however, in acknowledgement that the Freedom of Information Act contains the provision, CRT provides notice that the statutory exclusions described in the Office of Information Policy's website could potentially be applied to law enforcement information contained within CRT records.
Publicly available information for which a FOIA request is not required: Annual reports; general publications and related Civil Rights Division work. Publicly disseminated CRT publications can be found on this site under Publications.
“Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Civil Rights Division has adjusted its normal operations to balance the need of completing its mission as effectively and efficiently as possible while also adhering to the recommended social distancing for the safety of our staff.  As a result, you may experience a delay in receiving an initial acknowledgment as well as a substantive response to your FOIA request.  We will be able to acknowledge requests made electronically more quickly than by mail.  You may reach out to our FOIA Public Liaison if you have any questions about your request.  We apologize for this inconvenience and appreciate your understanding and patience.”
The Civil Rights Division of the Department of Justice, created in 1957 by the enactment of the Civil Rights Act of 1957, works to uphold the civil and constitutional rights of all persons in the United States, particularly some of the most vulnerable members of our society. The Division enforces federal statutes prohibiting discrimination on the basis of race, color, sex (including pregnancy, sexual orientation, and gender identity), disability, religion, familial status, national origin, and citizenship status.
Press ReleaseJustice Department and City of Albuquerque Seek Partial Termination of Consent Decree Covering the Albuquerque Police DepartmentThe Justice Department and the city of Albuquerque filed a joint motion today seeking court approval to terminate certain portions of the consent decree covering the Albuquerque Police...
Press ReleaseSouth Carolina Man Pleads Guilty to Obstructing Justice in the Murder of a Black Transgender WomanA South Carolina man pleaded guilty today to obstructing an investigation into the December 2019 murder of a transgender woman.
Press ReleaseFormer Mississippi Department of Corrections Officials Sentenced for Using Excessive Force Against an InmateThree former Mississippi Department of Corrections officials were sentenced today for using excessive force against an inmate, involving the use of dangerous weapons and resulting in bodily injury.
Press ReleaseGeorgia Man Charged for Making Racially-Motivated Threats and Shooting at His Black NeighborA Georgia man was arrested for making racially-motivated threats and shooting at his neighbor, a Black man, in violation of the criminal provision of the Fair Housing Act...
Press ReleaseOhio Man Pleads Guilty to Attempting to Burn Down a Church that Planned to Host Drag Show EventsAn Ohio man pleaded guilty yesterday to violating the Church Arson Prevention Act and to using fire and explosives to commit a felony, all in connection with his...
Press ReleaseReadout of Assistant Attorney General Kristen Clarke’s Trip to FloridaAssistant Attorney General Kristen Clarke of the Justice Department’s Civil Rights Division traveled to Jacksonville, Florida, on Oct. 19 to continue the division’s tour to engage with stakeholders...
Thank you for visiting the United States Department of Justice (DOJ or Department) website and reviewing our Privacy Policy. The Department is committed to protecting your privacy and securing the personal information made available to us when you access our public-facing websites and applications. This Privacy Policy describes what information is made available to the Department, what information the Department collects, how that information is used, and how information is stored when you visit the Department’s public-facing websites or official DOJ accounts on third-party websites and applications.
Information Collected and Stored AutomaticallyPersonal Information That You Voluntarily Provide Children and Privacy on Justice.govWebsite Measurement and Customization Technologies The Department’s Use of Third-Party Websites and ApplicationsEmail Subscriptions and Updates Links to External SitesSecurityVulnerability Disclosure Policy
The Department’s Chief Privacy and Civil Liberties Officer, in coordination with the Department’s Office of Privacy and Civil Liberties, manages and oversees the Department’s Privacy Program. The Department Privacy Program webpage can be found here: https://www.justice.gov/opcl.
The Department primarily collects this information for statistical analyses and technical improvements to the site. For example, the Department computer system uses software programs to create summary statistics that may be used for such purposes as assessing what information is of most and least interest to the public, determining technical design specifications, and identifying system performance or problem areas. Although the primary purpose of automatically collecting this kind of information is not to track individuals who visit this site, in certain circumstances and consistent with Federal law, the Department may take additional steps to identify you using this information and may share this information, including your identity, with other agencies.
The Department maintains official DOJ accounts on third-party websites and applications. These third-party website and application service providers may themselves automatically collect and store additional information about you, in accordance with their terms of service and privacy policies. The Department does not control what these third-parties service providers do with the information they collect. For information on the Department’s use of third-party websites and applications to engage with the public, please review the section below regarding the Department’s Use of Third-Party Websites and Applications.
You are not required to provide any personal information to us to access information on our websites. If you choose to provide us with personal information, such as by sending a message to an email address on this website or by filling out and submitting a form through our website, we will use that information to respond to your message or to fulfill the stated purpose of the communication. Where feasible, the Department provides visitors with a notice at the point of collection when requesting personal information on Department websites that will include a brief description of the Department’s practices with respect to the collection, use, maintenance, or dissemination of personal information.
The Department maintains and disposes of personal information you provide according to the requirements of the Federal Records Act, Department policies, and the regulations and records schedules approved by the National Archives and Records Administration. In some cases, the information you provide may be covered by the Privacy Act of 1974 (Privacy Act), or subject to the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). A discussion of the FOIA can be found at Department of Justice Guide to the Freedom of Information Act and a discussion about the Privacy Act can be found at Privacy Act of 1974.
The Department may share information you voluntarily provide it with other entities, consistent with the Privacy Act and other applicable laws. For example, information you voluntarily provide may be shared with contractors acting on the Department’s behalf, with another government agency if your inquiry relates to that agency, with other agencies for a specific law enforcement purpose or to protect the Department’s websites from security threats, or when otherwise required by law.
The Department will collect information you voluntarily provide as part of a search request on a DOJ website. If you choose to provide personal information as part of a search request on a Department webpage, the Department and its service providers will use that information to facilitate your search request. The Department of Justice, or a contractor operating on behalf of the Department,  may also automatically collect and store the information you provide as part of a search request as described in the section above regarding Information Collected and Stored Automatically. DOJ currently uses the General Services Administration’s (GSA) Search.gov (e.g., https://search.justice.gov) as its primary search engine tool for searching for information within DOJ websites. Upon entering search request information into search engines managed by Search.gov, GSA will collect and use certain information in accordance with the Search.gov Terms of Service.
The Department maintains official DOJ accounts on third-party websites and applications. When interacting with the public on third-party websites and applications, the Department may request that you voluntarily provide information to the Department (for example, the Department may request your information to register for an event hosted by the Department). These third-party website and application service providers may also collect the information you voluntarily provide, in accordance with their terms of service and privacy policies. The Department does not control what these third-parties service providers do with the information they collect. For information on the Department’s use of third-party websites and applications, please review the section below regarding Department’s Use of Third-Party Websites and Applications.
Remember that internet communications are not necessarily secure from interception. If your communication is sensitive or includes personal information, you may prefer to send it to the Department by postal mail or other commercial carriers instead.
We believe in the importance of protecting the privacy of children online and do not knowingly contact or collect personal information from children under 13.  Unless otherwise stated, our websites are not intended to solicit information of any kind from children under 13.
Website measurement and customization technologies (commonly called “cookies") are small bits of text that are downloaded to your internet browser when you visit a website. The Office of Management and Budget Memorandum M-10-22, Guidance for Online Use of Web Measurement and Customization Technologies, defines conditions under which Federal agencies may use session and persistent cookies, and categorizes them in “tiers” to identify their characteristics. You may control permissions for cookies on this or any other website by adjusting your individual browser settings for customized privacy protection – see https://www.usa.gov/optout-instructions for helpful guidance. You can still use Department websites if you do not accept the cookies, but you may be unable to use certain cookie-dependent features.
Session cookies are not stored on your computer’s hard drive, and are removed when you complete your session or exit the site. Some Department websites use these “Tier 1” session cookies to provide streamlined navigation and statistical analysis. These temporary cookies do not gather personally identifying information.
Certain Department websites use “Tier 2” persistent cookies that remain on your computer’s hard drive after you complete an activity. For example, some Department websites use persistent cookies in association with a voluntary customer satisfaction survey conducted by a third party, Foresee. These surveys obtain feedback and data regarding visitors’ satisfaction with our websites, but they do not collect any personally identifying information. If you are randomly selected to participate in this survey, a persistent cookie is stored on your computer’s hard drive for 90 days to preclude a new invitation during that time. Some Department websites also use persistent cookies to enable a Google Analytics, Siteimprove, or Webtrends program to measure how new and returning visitors use our websites over time. These persistent cookies do not collect any personally identifying information, and the information collected is used only to improve our websites.
In the interest of promoting transparency, public participation, and open government, the Department uses third-party websites (including social media platforms with official DOJ accounts) and third-party applications to enhance the user experience, promote access to information, and provide ease of navigation throughout Department websites. The Office of Management and Budget Memorandum M-10-23, Guidance for Agency Use of Third-Party Websites and Applications, defines conditions under which Federal agencies may use third-party websites and applications to engage with the public.
The Department currently maintains official DOJ accounts on several third-party websites and applications. The third-party service provider’s terms of service and privacy policies govern your activity on the third-party website or application. The Department does not control what these third-parties service providers do with the information they collect. You may wish to review the third-party service provider’s terms of service and privacy policies before using it to understand how and when the third-party service provider collects, uses, and/or shares information you make available by using its service. You can find the privacy policies for third-party websites and applications commonly used by the Department below.
The creation and use of official DOJ accounts on third-party websites and applications may cause personally identifying information to become available or accessible to the Department.  Such information may become available to the Department when a user provides, submits, communicates, links, posts, or associates information with official DOJ accounts (e.g., through “liking,” “friend-ing,” responding to tweets, or commenting on content provided by the Department). The Department does not control, moderate, or endorse the comments or opinions provided by you on official DOJ accounts.
The Department of Justice, or a contractor operating on behalf of the Department,  may automatically collect certain browser information, including the full internet address of the third-party service provider, if you travel directly to a Department website from the third-party application or website, as outlined in the section above regarding Information Collected and Stored Automatically;
DOJ may request that individuals voluntarily provide information to the Department through third-party websites and applications. In such cases, to the extent feasible, DOJ will provide a conspicuous notice written in plain language at locations where the public might submit such information;
In certain circumstances, DOJ Capstone Officials, which include DOJ Senior Leadership, Heads of Components, and their direct reports, may “share,” “retweet,” “friend,” “follow,” or respond publicly to content made available on official DOJ accounts.  To the extent that the Department’s “share,” “retweet,” “friend-ing,” “follow,” or public response constitutes the creation of a record under the Federal Records Act, the Department may be required to maintain and archive such interaction;
DOJ may collect and maintain information made available to the Department on official DOJ accounts for a specific law enforcement or national security purpose (for example, activity that indicates a violation or potential violation of law, a threat of physical harm, or harm to national security); and
The Department will not otherwise collect and maintain personally identifying information you make available on third-party websites and applications with official DOJ accounts. In all circumstances, the Department will only collect and maintain personally identifying information you make available on official DOJ accounts consistent with the Privacy Act, the Federal Records Act, and other applicable laws.
Certain Department webpages also contain embedded content and applications from third-party website and application service providers. DOJ provides embedded content and applications to further the Department’s interest in promoting transparency and open government.
In addition to the practices outlined in the sections above regarding Information Collected and Stored Automatically and the Personal Information That You Voluntarily Provide, these third-party service providers also collect information on visitors who visit a DOJ webpage hosting the embedded content or application. For more details on how and when these third-party service providers collect, use, and share information, you may wish to review their terms of service and privacy policies. The privacy policies for third-party websites and applications commonly used by the Department can be found below.
A list of official DOJ social media accounts can be found at: https://www.justice.gov/social. For more information on the Department’s use of third-party social media platforms used to communicate with the public, please refer to the Department’s adapted Privacy Impact Assessment, “Use of Third-Party Social Media Tools to Communicate with the Public.”
The Department maintains several lists of subscribers who have asked to receive periodic email updates. Any recipient of a Department email may unsubscribe from future messages via a link at the bottom of each email message. We do not sell, rent, exchange, or otherwise disclose our list subscribers to persons or organizations outside the Department.
Our email analytics provider, GovDelivery, also offers the capability to view some data, such as whether a mass email was opened, at an individual level for 30 days after an email was sent; as a matter of policy and practice this data is only viewed on an aggregate basis.
The Department’s websites may contain links to websites created and maintained by other public or private organizations. We provide these links as a service to visitors to our site. When you follow a link to an external site, you are leaving the Department and are subject to the privacy and security policies of the external site.
The Department’s websites may contain links to websites created and maintained by other public or private organizations. We provide these links as a service to visitors to our site. When you follow a link to an external site, you are leaving the Department’s website and are subject to the privacy and security policies of the external site.
For site security purposes and to ensure that this service remains available to all users, the Department’s information systems, and information systems operated by contractors on behalf of the Department, employ software programs to monitor network traffic to identify unauthorized attempts to upload or change information, or otherwise cause damage.  Anyone using these information systems expressly consents to such monitoring and is advised that if such monitoring reveals evidence of possible abuse or criminal activity, such evidence may be provided to appropriate law enforcement officials. Unauthorized attempts to upload or change information on these information systems are strictly prohibited and may be punishable by law, including the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986 and the National Information Infrastructure Protection Act of 1996.
Additionally, DOJ information systems, and information systems operated by contractors on behalf of the Department, may be protected by EINSTEIN cybersecurity capabilities under the operational control of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA). Electronic communications with DOJ may be scanned by government-owned or contractor equipment to look for network traffic indicating known or suspected malicious cyber activity, including malicious content or communications.
Electronic communications within DOJ will be collected or retained by CISA only if they are associated with known or suspected cyber threats. CISA will use the information collected through EINSTEIN to analyze the known or suspected cyber threat and help DOJ and other agencies respond and better protect their computers and networks.
For additional information about EINSTEIN capabilities, please see the EINSTEIN program-related Privacy Impact Assessments available on the U.S. Department of Homeland Security cybersecurity privacy website along with other information about the federal government’s cybersecurity activities.
The Department is committed to ensuring the security of the American public by safeguarding their digital information. The Vulnerability Disclosure Policy (VDP) provides guidelines for the cybersecurity research community and members of the general public (hereafter referred to as researchers) on conducting good faith vulnerability discovery activities directed at public facing DOJ websites and services.  The VDP also instructs researchers on how to submit discovered vulnerabilities to the DOJ’s Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO), within the Justice Management Division.
A lock (LockA locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (Title IX) prohibits sex (including pregnancy, sexual orientation, and gender identity) discrimination in any education program or activity receiving federal financial assistance.
The Title IX regulation states that "except for provided elsewhere in this part, no person shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any academic, extracurricular, research, occupational training, or other education program or activity operated by a recipient which receives ... Federal financial assistance ....
(b) Specific prohibitions. Except as provided in this subpart, in providing any aid, benefit, or service to a student, a recipient shall not, on the basis of sex:
(1) Treat one person differently from another in determining whether such person satisfies any requirement or condition for the provision of such aid, benefit, or service;
(6) Apply any rule concerning the domicile or residence of a student or applicant, including eligibility for in-state fees and tuition;
(7) Aid or perpetuate discrimination against any person by providing significant assistance to any agency, organization, or person which discriminates on the basis of sex in providing any aid, benefit or service to students or employees;
(8) Otherwise limit any person in the enjoyment of any right, privilege, advantage, or opportunity." 45 C.F.R. § 86.31
Disqualifying a person for a research position on the basis of sex when it is irrelevant to ability to perform the job;
Engaging in gender –based or sexual harassment such as making unwelcome sexual comments, advances, and/or name-calling on the basis of sex.
Federal courts and agencies have found that Title IX prohibits sex-based harassment, including sexual harassment, when such harassment is sufficiently serious as to limit the ability to participate in and benefit from a program or activity. Click here for more information on sex-based harassment.
Unwelcome and inappropriate advances to students and employees of a research lab funded by HHS made by professors, employees, researchers, teachers, and/or students;
Sexual assault of a student or employee by a doctor or other medical staff in a student sports medicine program or other clinical setting that receives HHS funding.
Title IX prohibits sex discrimination in the education programs and activities of entities that receive federal financial assistance. These programs and activities include "all of the operations of ... a college, university, or other postsecondary institution, or a public system of higher education." 20 U.S.C. § 1687(2)(A); see also 45 C.F.R. § 86.2(h). Therefore, Title IX's nondiscrimination protections apply to student recruitment, admissions, educational programs (including individual courses), research, housing, counseling, financial and employment assistance, health and insurance benefits and health services. The federal agency that provides the federal financial assistance has jurisdiction over Title IX complaints.
The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has jurisdiction over Title IX claims of discrimination against entities that receive federal financial assistance through HHS. Such entities include:
Colleges and universities, including all of the programs they operate, regardless of which program receives federal financial assistance from HHS. For example, a university would be covered by Title IX if:
The university's medical center receives Medicare reimbursements from the Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services;
The university's medical, dental, or nursing programs receive funds from the Health Resources and Services Administration.
Education programs and activities of entities that are not colleges or universities but receive federal financial assistance from HHS for their educational program or activity. For example:
Fatherhood programs providing job training, financial education and other educational programs that receive grants through the Administration for Children & Families.
HHS OCR also has jurisdiction under Section 1557 of the Affordable Care Act (Section 1557) to investigate complaints of sex discrimination in health programs and activities of recipients of federal financial assistance and other covered entities.  Click here for more information about Section 1557.
You can file a complaint with OCR if you have been subjected to sex discrimination, including sexual harassment, in an education program or activity that may have received HHS funds.
We will promptly inform you as to whether we have jurisdiction to investigate your complaint. If we determine that the entity named in your complaint does not receive HHS funds, but receives funds from a different federal agency, we will forward the complaint to the appropriate agency.
Certain types of complaints may be forwarded to another agency. The U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) regulations generally require referral of individual employment complaints of sex discrimination to the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC).  If there is a pattern and practice of employment discrimination or if the complaint alleges discrimination in employment and in other practices of a recipient, then OCR can investigate the complaint.
If you are not sure about whether OCR has jurisdiction to investigate your complaint, file a complaint with our office and we will help answer your questions through the complaint intake process and our initial evaluation of the complaint. For more information on how to file a complaint, click here.
Please note that Title IX specifically prohibits retaliation for filing a discrimination complaint. When investigating a complaint, OCR informs all recipients of the prohibition on retaliation. In addition, during the complaint process, OCR will seek the complainant's consent to reveal his/her identity or identifying information, if necessary, to investigate the complaint. Consent is voluntary, and it is not always needed to investigate a complaint. Failure to provide consent, however, may make it difficult to investigate some aspects of the complaint.
If OCR determines that it has jurisdiction, OCR will investigate the complaint or, in some cases, refer the complaint to an agency with joint jurisdiction. When OCR identifies a violation or compliance concern, it will work with the recipient to achieve compliance with the law. Depending on the scope of the changes required, complaints can be resolved through voluntary compliance letters or agreements requiring the recipient to develop policies, monitoring, notification, and training, which also resolve the specific incidents alleged in the complaint. If voluntary compliance cannot be achieved, OCR can issue a formal findings letter and refer the case to DOJ or begin administrative proceedings to revoke federal funds.
*This content is undergoing a Section 508 review.  If you need immediate assistance accessing this content, please submit a request to OCRMail@hhs.gov. Content will be updated pending the outcome of the Section 508 review.
A lock (LockA locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (Title IX) prohibits sex (including pregnancy, sexual orientation, and gender identity) discrimination in any education program or activity receiving federal financial assistance.
The Title IX regulation states that "except for provided elsewhere in this part, no person shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any academic, extracurricular, research, occupational training, or other education program or activity operated by a recipient which receives ... Federal financial assistance ....
(b) Specific prohibitions. Except as provided in this subpart, in providing any aid, benefit, or service to a student, a recipient shall not, on the basis of sex:
(1) Treat one person differently from another in determining whether such person satisfies any requirement or condition for the provision of such aid, benefit, or service;
(6) Apply any rule concerning the domicile or residence of a student or applicant, including eligibility for in-state fees and tuition;
(7) Aid or perpetuate discrimination against any person by providing significant assistance to any agency, organization, or person which discriminates on the basis of sex in providing any aid, benefit or service to students or employees;
(8) Otherwise limit any person in the enjoyment of any right, privilege, advantage, or opportunity." 45 C.F.R. § 86.31
Disqualifying a person for a research position on the basis of sex when it is irrelevant to ability to perform the job;
Engaging in gender –based or sexual harassment such as making unwelcome sexual comments, advances, and/or name-calling on the basis of sex.
Federal courts and agencies have found that Title IX prohibits sex-based harassment, including sexual harassment, when such harassment is sufficiently serious as to limit the ability to participate in and benefit from a program or activity. Click here for more information on sex-based harassment.
Unwelcome and inappropriate advances to students and employees of a research lab funded by HHS made by professors, employees, researchers, teachers, and/or students;
Sexual assault of a student or employee by a doctor or other medical staff in a student sports medicine program or other clinical setting that receives HHS funding.
Title IX prohibits sex discrimination in the education programs and activities of entities that receive federal financial assistance. These programs and activities include "all of the operations of ... a college, university, or other postsecondary institution, or a public system of higher education." 20 U.S.C. § 1687(2)(A); see also 45 C.F.R. § 86.2(h). Therefore, Title IX's nondiscrimination protections apply to student recruitment, admissions, educational programs (including individual courses), research, housing, counseling, financial and employment assistance, health and insurance benefits and health services. The federal agency that provides the federal financial assistance has jurisdiction over Title IX complaints.
The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has jurisdiction over Title IX claims of discrimination against entities that receive federal financial assistance through HHS. Such entities include:
Colleges and universities, including all of the programs they operate, regardless of which program receives federal financial assistance from HHS. For example, a university would be covered by Title IX if:
The university's medical center receives Medicare reimbursements from the Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services;
The university's medical, dental, or nursing programs receive funds from the Health Resources and Services Administration.
Education programs and activities of entities that are not colleges or universities but receive federal financial assistance from HHS for their educational program or activity. For example:
Fatherhood programs providing job training, financial education and other educational programs that receive grants through the Administration for Children & Families.
HHS OCR also has jurisdiction under Section 1557 of the Affordable Care Act (Section 1557) to investigate complaints of sex discrimination in health programs and activities of recipients of federal financial assistance and other covered entities.  Click here for more information about Section 1557.
You can file a complaint with OCR if you have been subjected to sex discrimination, including sexual harassment, in an education program or activity that may have received HHS funds.
We will promptly inform you as to whether we have jurisdiction to investigate your complaint. If we determine that the entity named in your complaint does not receive HHS funds, but receives funds from a different federal agency, we will forward the complaint to the appropriate agency.
Certain types of complaints may be forwarded to another agency. The U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) regulations generally require referral of individual employment complaints of sex discrimination to the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC).  If there is a pattern and practice of employment discrimination or if the complaint alleges discrimination in employment and in other practices of a recipient, then OCR can investigate the complaint.
If you are not sure about whether OCR has jurisdiction to investigate your complaint, file a complaint with our office and we will help answer your questions through the complaint intake process and our initial evaluation of the complaint. For more information on how to file a complaint, click here.
Please note that Title IX specifically prohibits retaliation for filing a discrimination complaint. When investigating a complaint, OCR informs all recipients of the prohibition on retaliation. In addition, during the complaint process, OCR will seek the complainant's consent to reveal his/her identity or identifying information, if necessary, to investigate the complaint. Consent is voluntary, and it is not always needed to investigate a complaint. Failure to provide consent, however, may make it difficult to investigate some aspects of the complaint.
If OCR determines that it has jurisdiction, OCR will investigate the complaint or, in some cases, refer the complaint to an agency with joint jurisdiction. When OCR identifies a violation or compliance concern, it will work with the recipient to achieve compliance with the law. Depending on the scope of the changes required, complaints can be resolved through voluntary compliance letters or agreements requiring the recipient to develop policies, monitoring, notification, and training, which also resolve the specific incidents alleged in the complaint. If voluntary compliance cannot be achieved, OCR can issue a formal findings letter and refer the case to DOJ or begin administrative proceedings to revoke federal funds.
*This content is undergoing a Section 508 review.  If you need immediate assistance accessing this content, please submit a request to OCRMail@hhs.gov. Content will be updated pending the outcome of the Section 508 review.
A lock (LockA locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Agencies create regulations (also known as "rules") under the authority of Congress to help government carry out public policy. Learn about HHS' top regulations and how you can make your voice heard.
How to file a Medicare complaint or appeal a decisionFiling a complaint onlineRegistering an institutional review board (IRB) or obtaining a Federalwide Assu…
The Immediate Office of the Secretary has issued a Request for Information (RFI) to solicit input from the public to help identify duplicative regulations and the problems they create.
Institutions engaging in most HHS-supported human subject research must have an approved assurance of compliance with protective HHS regulations.
The Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act supports the development of a nationwide health IT infrastructure.
Find laws and regulations on civil rights, privacy rights, research, fraud prevention and detection, freedom of information, tribal matters, employment, and more.
Find out how to file a complaint or appeal a decision related to health information privacy, civil rights, Medicare, and more.
Learn about Public Readiness and Emergency Preparedness (PREP) Act declarations and explore related advisory opinions and guidance.
Each fall and spring, the Department publishes a semiannual regulatory agenda in the Federal Register. It lists all HHS regulations under development or review.
As part of the Unified Agenda of Federal Regulatory and Deregulatory Actions, HHS publishes a statement of our regulatory priorities for the coming year.
HHS Guidance Portal is a searchable database for HHS guidance documents currently in effect. Guidance documents may include interpretive memoranda, policy statements, manuals, bulletins, advisories, and more.
We invite suggestions of regulations to review – this helps us decide if they should be eliminated or modified.
The Regulatory Flexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 610, directs HHS to periodically review regulations that have a significant economic impact upon a substantial number of small entities (“SEISNOSE”).
A lock (LockA locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Section 1557 NPRMPharmacy Guidance on Reproductive Health CareHHS and DOJ Guidance on Telehealth and DisabilityEnvironmental Justice
We enforce laws against discrimination based on race, color, national origin, disability, age, sex, and religion by certain health care and human services providers and health insurance plans.
You may file a civil rights complaint with OCR if you feel a health care provider or government agency discriminated against you (or someone else) unlawfully.
Read about special topics in civil rights: Child welfare services, HIV/AIDS, limited English proficiency, community living and more.
Find guidance and more information about the HIPAA Privacy Rule, including what information is protected and how health information is used and disclosed.
The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) ensures equal access to certain health and human services and protects the privacy and security of health information.
HHS enforces federal laws that protect conscience and the free exercise of religion and prohibit coercion and religious discrimination in health and human services.
* People using assistive technology may not be able to fully access information in these files. For assistance, contact the HHS Office for Civil Rights at (800) 368-1019, TDD toll-free: (800) 537-7697, or by emailing OCRMail@hhs.gov.
A lock (LockA locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
OCR enforces the following laws as they apply to recipients of HHS federal financial assistance. Links are from GPO.gov unless otherwise noted.
If you are using the online version for legal research, you should verify your results against the printed version.
Section 1557 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 USC 18116) and its implementing regulation provide that an individual shall not be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination on the grounds prohibited under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq. (race, color, national origin), Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, 20 U.S.C. 1681 et seq. (sex), the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, 42 U.S.C. 6101 et seq. (age), or Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. 794 (disability), under any health program or activity, any part of which is receiving federal financial assistance; any program or activity administered by the Department under Title I of the Act; or any program or activity administered by any entity established under such Title. The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has enforcement authority with respect to health programs and activities that receive federal financial assistance from the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), or are administered by HHS or any entity established under Title I of the Affordable Care Act. OCR is responsible for enforcing regulations issued under Section 1557 of the Affordable Care Act (Section 1557), protecting the civil rights of individuals who access or seek to access covered health programs or activities. Section 1557 prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, or sex (including pregnancy, sexual orientation, and gender identity) in covered health programs or activities. 42 U.S.C. § 18116(a).
On June 15, 2020, the U.S. Supreme Court held that Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII)’s prohibition on employment discrimination based on sex encompasses discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity. Bostock v. Clayton County, GA, 140 S. Ct. 1731 (2020). The Bostock majority concluded that the plain meaning of “because of sex” in Title VII necessarily included discrimination because of sexual orientation and gender identity. Id. at 1753-54.
Since Bostock, two federal circuits have concluded that the plain language of Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972’s (Title IX) prohibition on sex discrimination must be read similarly. See Grimm v. Gloucester Cnty. Sch. Bd., 972 F.3d 586, 616 (4th Cir. 2020), as amended (Aug. 28, 2020), reh’g en banc denied, 976 F.3d 399 (4th Cir. 2020), petition for cert. filed, No. 20-1163 (Feb. 24, 2021); Adams v. Sch. Bd. of St. Johns Cnty., 968 F.3d 1286, 1305 (11th Cir. 2020), petition for reh’g en banc pending, No. 18-13592 (Aug. 28, 2020). In addition, on March 26, 2021, the Civil Rights Division of the U.S. Department of Justice issued a memorandum to Federal Agency Civil Rights Directors and General Counsel concluding that the Supreme Court’s reasoning in Bostock applies to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972. As made clear by the Affordable Care Act, Section 1557 prohibits discrimination “on the grounds prohibited under . . . Title IX.” 42 U.S.C. § 18116(a).
Consistent with the Supreme Court’s decision in Bostock and Title IX, beginning May 10, 2021, OCR will interpret and enforce Section 1557’s prohibition on discrimination on the basis of sex to include: (1) discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation; and (2) discrimination on the basis of gender identity. This interpretation will guide OCR in processing complaints and conducting investigations, but does not itself determine the outcome in any particular case or set of facts.
In enforcing Section 1557, as stated above, OCR will comply with the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, 42 U.S.C. § 2000bb et seq., and all other legal requirements. Additionally, OCR will comply with all applicable court orders that have been issued in litigation involving the Section 1557 regulations, including Franciscan Alliance, Inc. v. Azar, 414 F. Supp. 3d 928 (N.D. Tex. 2019); Whitman-Walker Clinic, Inc. v. U.S. Dep’t of Health & Hum. Servs., 485 F. Supp. 3d 1 (D.D.C. 2020); Asapansa-Johnson Walker v. Azar, No. 20-CV-2834, 2020 WL 6363970 (E.D.N.Y. Oct. 29, 2020); and Religious Sisters of Mercy v. Azar, No. 3:16-CV-00386, 2021 WL 191009 (D.N.D. Jan. 19, 2021).
OCR applies the enforcement mechanisms provided for and available under Title IX when enforcing Section 1557’s prohibition on sex discrimination. 45 C.F.R. § 92.5(a). Title IX's enforcement procedures can be found at 45 C.F.R. § 86.71 (adopting the procedures at 45 C.F.R. §§ 80.6 through 80.11 and 45 C.F.R. Part 81).
Note: On October 15, 2019 and November 21, 2019, the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Texas in Franciscan Alliance, Inc. v. Azar issued, respectively, a Memorandum and Opinion and Order in which the court vacated portions of Section 1557 insofar as the rule defines “on the basis of sex” to include gender identity and termination of pregnancy.  OCR will continue to abide by the vacatur.
For additional information about Section 1557 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act as well as applicable court orders, please see: https://www.hhs.gov/civil-rights/for-individuals/section-1557/index.html.
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, as amended, (20 USC § 1681) prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex in federally-assisted education programs. The non-discrimination protections apply to student recruitment, admissions, educational programs (including individual courses), housing, counseling, financial and employment assistance, health and insurance benefits and services. It also covers employment practices and benefits (45 CFR Part 86).
Sections 794 & 855 of the Public Health Service Act (42 USC §§ 295m & 296g) prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex in federally assisted health training programs (45 CFR Part 83).
Section 533 of the Public Health Service Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of age, race, color, national origin, disability, sex, or religion in Projects for Assistance in Transition from Homelessness (42 USC § 290cc-33).
The Family Violence Prevention and Services Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, disability, sex, or religion in programs, services, and activities funded under this Act (42 USC § 10406).
The Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Act of 1981 prohibits discrimination on the basis of age, race, color, national origin, disability, or sex in programs, services, and activities funded under this Act (42 USC § 8625).
The Communications Act of 1934, as amended by Equal Employment Opportunity provisions, prohibit employment discrimination on the basis of age, race, color, religion, national origin, or sex by Federally-funded public telecommunication entities (47 USC § 398).
Section 508 of the Social Security Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of age, race, color, national origin, disability, sex, or religion in the Maternal and Child Health Services Block Grant (42 USC § 708).
Section 1908 of the Public Health Service Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of age, race, color, national origin, disability, sex, or religion in programs, services, and activities funded by Preventive Health and Health Services Block Grants (42 USC § 300w-7). [source: www.house.gov]
Section 1947 of the Public Health Service Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of age, race, color, national origin, disability, sex, or religion in programs, services, and activities funded by Community Mental Health Services Block Grant and Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grants (42 USC § 300x-57).
The Community Services Block Grant Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of age, race, color, national origin, disability, or sex in programs, services, and activities funded under this Act (42 USC § 9918).
A lock (LockA locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
We enforce laws against discrimination based on race, color, national origin, disability, age, religion, and sex (including pregnancy, sexual orientation, and gender identity) by certain health care and human services.
Title VI protects people of every race, color, or national origin from unlawful discrimination in HHS-funded programs and activities.
OCR enforces laws and regulations that prohibit discrimination on the basis of disability in programs, services, activities, and facilities.
OCR enforces the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (Age Act), which prohibits discrimination on the basis of age in HHS-funded programs and activities.
OCR enforces laws and regulations that prohibit discrimination on the basis of sex in many HHS-funded programs and activities.
Section 1557 prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or disability in HHS-funded programs and activities and ACA Marketplaces.
The Hill-Burton Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, creed, and other grounds in certain medical facilities.
Section 1553 of the Affordable Care Act prohibits discrimination against individuals or health care entities that do not provide assisted suicide services.
Read about special topics in civil rights: Child welfare services, HIV/AIDS, limited English proficiency, community living and more.
Understand your rights to receive services and benefits in programs and activities funded by HHS without facing unlawful discrimination.
HHS complies with applicable Federal civil rights laws and does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, or sex.
A lock (LockA locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
OCR enforces the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (Age Act), which prohibits discrimination on the basis of age in HHS-funded programs and activities.
Under the Age Act, recipients may not exclude, deny, or limit services to, or otherwise discriminate against, persons on the basis of age.
An action that reasonably takes age into account as a factor that is necessary to the normal operation or achievement of a statutory objective of a program
OCR also enforces Section 1557 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act which provides that an individual shall not be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination including on the grounds prohibited under, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (age) under any health program or activity, any part of which is receiving federal financial assistance, or under any program or activity that is administered by an Executive Agency or any entity established under Title I of the Affordable Care Act or its amendments.
OCR can only investigate health programs and activities that receive federal financial assistance from the HHS or are administered by HHS or any entity established under Title I of the Affordable Care Act or its amendments.
45 CFR Part 90 - Nondiscrimination on the basis of age in programs or activities receiving federal financial assistance
45 CFR Part 91 - Nondiscrimination on the basis of age in programs or services receiving HHS financial assistance
* People using assistive technology may not be able to fully access information in this file. For assistance, contact the HHS Office for Civil Rights at (800) 368-1019, TDD toll-free: (800) 537-7697, or by emailing OCRMail@hhs.gov.
A lock (LockA locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
OCR enforces the following laws as they apply to recipients of HHS federal financial assistance. Links are from GPO.gov unless otherwise noted.
If you are using the online version for legal research, you should verify your results against the printed version.
Section 1557 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42 USC 18116) and its implementing regulation provide that an individual shall not be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination on the grounds prohibited under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq. (race, color, national origin), Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, 20 U.S.C. 1681 et seq. (sex), the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, 42 U.S.C. 6101 et seq. (age), or Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. 794 (disability), under any health program or activity, any part of which is receiving federal financial assistance; any program or activity administered by the Department under Title I of the Act; or any program or activity administered by any entity established under such Title. The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has enforcement authority with respect to health programs and activities that receive federal financial assistance from the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), or are administered by HHS or any entity established under Title I of the Affordable Care Act. OCR is responsible for enforcing regulations issued under Section 1557 of the Affordable Care Act (Section 1557), protecting the civil rights of individuals who access or seek to access covered health programs or activities. Section 1557 prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, or sex (including pregnancy, sexual orientation, and gender identity) in covered health programs or activities. 42 U.S.C. § 18116(a).
On June 15, 2020, the U.S. Supreme Court held that Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII)’s prohibition on employment discrimination based on sex encompasses discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity. Bostock v. Clayton County, GA, 140 S. Ct. 1731 (2020). The Bostock majority concluded that the plain meaning of “because of sex” in Title VII necessarily included discrimination because of sexual orientation and gender identity. Id. at 1753-54.
Since Bostock, two federal circuits have concluded that the plain language of Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972’s (Title IX) prohibition on sex discrimination must be read similarly. See Grimm v. Gloucester Cnty. Sch. Bd., 972 F.3d 586, 616 (4th Cir. 2020), as amended (Aug. 28, 2020), reh’g en banc denied, 976 F.3d 399 (4th Cir. 2020), petition for cert. filed, No. 20-1163 (Feb. 24, 2021); Adams v. Sch. Bd. of St. Johns Cnty., 968 F.3d 1286, 1305 (11th Cir. 2020), petition for reh’g en banc pending, No. 18-13592 (Aug. 28, 2020). In addition, on March 26, 2021, the Civil Rights Division of the U.S. Department of Justice issued a memorandum to Federal Agency Civil Rights Directors and General Counsel concluding that the Supreme Court’s reasoning in Bostock applies to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972. As made clear by the Affordable Care Act, Section 1557 prohibits discrimination “on the grounds prohibited under . . . Title IX.” 42 U.S.C. § 18116(a).
Consistent with the Supreme Court’s decision in Bostock and Title IX, beginning May 10, 2021, OCR will interpret and enforce Section 1557’s prohibition on discrimination on the basis of sex to include: (1) discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation; and (2) discrimination on the basis of gender identity. This interpretation will guide OCR in processing complaints and conducting investigations, but does not itself determine the outcome in any particular case or set of facts.
In enforcing Section 1557, as stated above, OCR will comply with the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, 42 U.S.C. § 2000bb et seq., and all other legal requirements. Additionally, OCR will comply with all applicable court orders that have been issued in litigation involving the Section 1557 regulations, including Franciscan Alliance, Inc. v. Azar, 414 F. Supp. 3d 928 (N.D. Tex. 2019); Whitman-Walker Clinic, Inc. v. U.S. Dep’t of Health & Hum. Servs., 485 F. Supp. 3d 1 (D.D.C. 2020); Asapansa-Johnson Walker v. Azar, No. 20-CV-2834, 2020 WL 6363970 (E.D.N.Y. Oct. 29, 2020); and Religious Sisters of Mercy v. Azar, No. 3:16-CV-00386, 2021 WL 191009 (D.N.D. Jan. 19, 2021).
OCR applies the enforcement mechanisms provided for and available under Title IX when enforcing Section 1557’s prohibition on sex discrimination. 45 C.F.R. § 92.5(a). Title IX's enforcement procedures can be found at 45 C.F.R. § 86.71 (adopting the procedures at 45 C.F.R. §§ 80.6 through 80.11 and 45 C.F.R. Part 81).
Note: On October 15, 2019 and November 21, 2019, the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Texas in Franciscan Alliance, Inc. v. Azar issued, respectively, a Memorandum and Opinion and Order in which the court vacated portions of Section 1557 insofar as the rule defines “on the basis of sex” to include gender identity and termination of pregnancy.  OCR will continue to abide by the vacatur.
For additional information about Section 1557 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act as well as applicable court orders, please see: https://www.hhs.gov/civil-rights/for-individuals/section-1557/index.html.
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, as amended, (20 USC § 1681) prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex in federally-assisted education programs. The non-discrimination protections apply to student recruitment, admissions, educational programs (including individual courses), housing, counseling, financial and employment assistance, health and insurance benefits and services. It also covers employment practices and benefits (45 CFR Part 86).
Sections 794 & 855 of the Public Health Service Act (42 USC §§ 295m & 296g) prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex in federally assisted health training programs (45 CFR Part 83).
Section 533 of the Public Health Service Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of age, race, color, national origin, disability, sex, or religion in Projects for Assistance in Transition from Homelessness (42 USC § 290cc-33).
The Family Violence Prevention and Services Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, disability, sex, or religion in programs, services, and activities funded under this Act (42 USC § 10406).
The Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Act of 1981 prohibits discrimination on the basis of age, race, color, national origin, disability, or sex in programs, services, and activities funded under this Act (42 USC § 8625).
The Communications Act of 1934, as amended by Equal Employment Opportunity provisions, prohibit employment discrimination on the basis of age, race, color, religion, national origin, or sex by Federally-funded public telecommunication entities (47 USC § 398).
Section 508 of the Social Security Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of age, race, color, national origin, disability, sex, or religion in the Maternal and Child Health Services Block Grant (42 USC § 708).
Section 1908 of the Public Health Service Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of age, race, color, national origin, disability, sex, or religion in programs, services, and activities funded by Preventive Health and Health Services Block Grants (42 USC § 300w-7). [source: www.house.gov]
Section 1947 of the Public Health Service Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of age, race, color, national origin, disability, sex, or religion in programs, services, and activities funded by Community Mental Health Services Block Grant and Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grants (42 USC § 300x-57).
The Community Services Block Grant Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of age, race, color, national origin, disability, or sex in programs, services, and activities funded under this Act (42 USC § 9918).
A lock (LockA locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (Title IX) prohibits sex (including pregnancy, sexual orientation, and gender identity) discrimination in any education program or activity receiving federal financial assistance.
The Title IX regulation states that "except for provided elsewhere in this part, no person shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any academic, extracurricular, research, occupational training, or other education program or activity operated by a recipient which receives ... Federal financial assistance ....
(b) Specific prohibitions. Except as provided in this subpart, in providing any aid, benefit, or service to a student, a recipient shall not, on the basis of sex:
(1) Treat one person differently from another in determining whether such person satisfies any requirement or condition for the provision of such aid, benefit, or service;
(6) Apply any rule concerning the domicile or residence of a student or applicant, including eligibility for in-state fees and tuition;
(7) Aid or perpetuate discrimination against any person by providing significant assistance to any agency, organization, or person which discriminates on the basis of sex in providing any aid, benefit or service to students or employees;
(8) Otherwise limit any person in the enjoyment of any right, privilege, advantage, or opportunity." 45 C.F.R. § 86.31
Disqualifying a person for a research position on the basis of sex when it is irrelevant to ability to perform the job;
Engaging in gender –based or sexual harassment such as making unwelcome sexual comments, advances, and/or name-calling on the basis of sex.
Federal courts and agencies have found that Title IX prohibits sex-based harassment, including sexual harassment, when such harassment is sufficiently serious as to limit the ability to participate in and benefit from a program or activity. Click here for more information on sex-based harassment.
Unwelcome and inappropriate advances to students and employees of a research lab funded by HHS made by professors, employees, researchers, teachers, and/or students;
Sexual assault of a student or employee by a doctor or other medical staff in a student sports medicine program or other clinical setting that receives HHS funding.
Title IX prohibits sex discrimination in the education programs and activities of entities that receive federal financial assistance. These programs and activities include "all of the operations of ... a college, university, or other postsecondary institution, or a public system of higher education." 20 U.S.C. § 1687(2)(A); see also 45 C.F.R. § 86.2(h). Therefore, Title IX's nondiscrimination protections apply to student recruitment, admissions, educational programs (including individual courses), research, housing, counseling, financial and employment assistance, health and insurance benefits and health services. The federal agency that provides the federal financial assistance has jurisdiction over Title IX complaints.
The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has jurisdiction over Title IX claims of discrimination against entities that receive federal financial assistance through HHS. Such entities include:
Colleges and universities, including all of the programs they operate, regardless of which program receives federal financial assistance from HHS. For example, a university would be covered by Title IX if:
The university's medical center receives Medicare reimbursements from the Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services;
The university's medical, dental, or nursing programs receive funds from the Health Resources and Services Administration.
Education programs and activities of entities that are not colleges or universities but receive federal financial assistance from HHS for their educational program or activity. For example:
Fatherhood programs providing job training, financial education and other educational programs that receive grants through the Administration for Children & Families.
HHS OCR also has jurisdiction under Section 1557 of the Affordable Care Act (Section 1557) to investigate complaints of sex discrimination in health programs and activities of recipients of federal financial assistance and other covered entities.  Click here for more information about Section 1557.
You can file a complaint with OCR if you have been subjected to sex discrimination, including sexual harassment, in an education program or activity that may have received HHS funds.
We will promptly inform you as to whether we have jurisdiction to investigate your complaint. If we determine that the entity named in your complaint does not receive HHS funds, but receives funds from a different federal agency, we will forward the complaint to the appropriate agency.
Certain types of complaints may be forwarded to another agency. The U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) regulations generally require referral of individual employment complaints of sex discrimination to the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC).  If there is a pattern and practice of employment discrimination or if the complaint alleges discrimination in employment and in other practices of a recipient, then OCR can investigate the complaint.
If you are not sure about whether OCR has jurisdiction to investigate your complaint, file a complaint with our office and we will help answer your questions through the complaint intake process and our initial evaluation of the complaint. For more information on how to file a complaint, click here.
Please note that Title IX specifically prohibits retaliation for filing a discrimination complaint. When investigating a complaint, OCR informs all recipients of the prohibition on retaliation. In addition, during the complaint process, OCR will seek the complainant's consent to reveal his/her identity or identifying information, if necessary, to investigate the complaint. Consent is voluntary, and it is not always needed to investigate a complaint. Failure to provide consent, however, may make it difficult to investigate some aspects of the complaint.
If OCR determines that it has jurisdiction, OCR will investigate the complaint or, in some cases, refer the complaint to an agency with joint jurisdiction. When OCR identifies a violation or compliance concern, it will work with the recipient to achieve compliance with the law. Depending on the scope of the changes required, complaints can be resolved through voluntary compliance letters or agreements requiring the recipient to develop policies, monitoring, notification, and training, which also resolve the specific incidents alleged in the complaint. If voluntary compliance cannot be achieved, OCR can issue a formal findings letter and refer the case to DOJ or begin administrative proceedings to revoke federal funds.
*This content is undergoing a Section 508 review.  If you need immediate assistance accessing this content, please submit a request to OCRMail@hhs.gov. Content will be updated pending the outcome of the Section 508 review.
A lock (LockA locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Learn about how federal nondiscrimination laws apply to opioid use disorder treatment and recovery services, including Medication Assisted Treatment:
HHS Video Series on Federal Disability Rights Protections That Apply to Some Individuals in Recovery from an Opioid Use Disorder
As part of a shared commitment to ensuring protections from discrimination apply to all people, including those in treatment for or recovery from substance use disorders, the Office for Civil Rights (OCR), the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), and the Administration for Children and Families (ACF) at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) have partnered with the National Center on Substance Abuse and Child Welfare (NCSACW) to produce a video series, “Civil Rights Protections for Individuals in Recovery from an Opioid Use Disorder.”  The five-part series informs audiences about the application of federal disability rights laws to child welfare programs and activities, discusses protections that apply to some individuals in recovery from an opioid use disorder, provides an overview of medication-assisted treatment (MAT), and addresses common misconceptions about MAT as a treatment approach.
Two pre-recorded civil rights webinars: The first video  provides foundational information on the application of federal disability rights laws to child welfare programs and activities; the second video  explores federal disability rights protections that apply to some individuals in recovery from an opioid use disorder.
A motion graphic which provides an overview of  MAT and addresses common misconceptions surrounding this treatment approach as they pertain to child welfare practice.
Two animated videos depicting discussions around misconceptions individuals may have about MAT  and how federal disability rights laws protect some individuals in recovery  from an opioid use disorder.
These resources provide needed training for personnel in the child welfare system on federal disability rights laws.  Intended audiences include but are not limited to: child welfare caseworkers, social workers, service providers, parent’s attorneys, agency attorneys, children’s attorneys, advocates, Court Appointed Special Advocates (CASA), judges and judicial officers, Court Improvement Program personnel, Family Treatment Court personnel, substance use disorder treatment providers, and other child welfare stakeholders.  The videos also inform individuals in recovery about protections they may have under federal disability rights laws. View the complete video series.
Support from family members and friends is key to helping people struggling with opioid addiction, but their loved ones can’t help if they aren’t informed of the problem. Following President Trump’s call to action that led to the declaration of a nationwide public health emergency regarding the opioid crisis, the HHS Office for Civil Rights has released new guidance explaining when HIPAA permits healthcare providers and other covered entities to share a patient’s health information with loved ones and others involved in a patient’s care in these situations.
Providers can share information with an individual patient's loved ones in certain emergency or dangerous situations, such as when the patient is in a crisis and incapacitated, or is facing a serious and imminent threat of harm.
Patients with decision-making capacity retain their right to decide when and whether their information will be shared, unless there is a serious and imminent threat of harm.
Patients' personal representatives, who have authority under state law tomake health care decsions for patients, may request and obtain information on behalf of patients.
For consumers, more information on HIPAA protections for mental health and substance use disorder treatment is available here:  https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-individuals/mental-health/index.html
For health professionals, more information on HIPAA and mental and behavioral health, including opioid overdose, is available here: https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/special-topics/mental-health/index.html
A lock (LockA locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) ensures that HHS-funded health care and human services providers follow federal laws prohibiting discrimination based on national origin. OCR conducts investigations to determine whether policies or practices have an unequal impact on the people of a certain national origin(s).
OCR will help make sure you are not denied or deterred from obtaining benefits on the basis of your national origin. If you request assistance, OCR will also provide technical assistance to your healthcare and human services providers.
HHS, HUD and DOJ Issue Letter to State/Local Agencies regarding Life and Safety Benefits for Immigrants – Issued by U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), and the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ)
OCR Guidance – Regarding Inquiries into Citizenship, Immigration Status and Social Security Numbers in State Applications for Medicaid, State Children's Health Insurance Program (SCHIP), Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), and Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) or Food Stamp Benefits
A lock (LockA locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Fact Sheet: Protecting Patients and Recipients of Human Services from Discrimination Based on Actual or Perceived Shared Ancestry or Ethnic Characteristics
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Office for Civil Rights (OCR) enforces several civil rights laws that prohibit discrimination. These include, but are not limited to, Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and its implementing regulations (Title VI)1, which prohibits discrimination based on race, color, or national origin in any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance from the Department, and Section 1557 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and its implementing regulations (Section 1557), which also prohibits discrimination on various bases, including, but not limited to, race, color, and national origin, in covered health programs and activities.2 This bulletin describes how these laws may protect individuals who are or are perceived to be Jewish, Christian, Muslim, Sikh, Hindu, Buddhist, or of another religious group.
What Federal Laws Protect People from Unlawful Discrimination Based on Shared Ancestry or Ethnic Characteristics?
Title VI and Section 1557’s protection from race, color, or national origin discrimination extends to individuals who experience discrimination, including harassment, based on their actual or perceived: (i) shared ancestry or ethnic characteristics; or (ii) citizenship or residency in a country with a dominant religion or distinct religious identity.
Title VI and Section 1557 prohibit discrimination against individuals, including those who are or perceived to be Jewish, Christian, Muslim, Sikh, Hindu, or Buddhist, or of another religious group, if the discrimination is based on their ancestry or ethnic characteristics.
Examples of the kinds of incidents that could, depending upon the specific facts and circumstances, raise concerns under Title VI and Section 1557
A hospital denies staff or facility privileges to an Iraqi medical resident because she speaks with a foreign accent and wears a traditional headscarf.
An emergency room patient requests that a hospital change his attending physician because the patient associates the physician’s surname with Judaism and Israel, and the hospital honors the request.
A mental health clinic regularly provides inferior services, including longer wait times, to an individual perceived to come from a foreign country because of his religious attire.
Section 508 of the Social Security Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of age, race, color, national origin, disability, sex, or religion in the Maternal and Child Health Services Block Grant (42 USC § 708).
Section 533 of the Public Health Service Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of age, race, color, national origin, disability, sex, or religion in Projects for Assistance in Transition from Homelessness (42 USC § 290cc-33).
Section 1908 of the Public Health Service Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of age, race, color, national origin, disability, sex, or religion in programs, services, and activities funded by Preventive Health and Health Services Block Grants (42 USC §300w-7).
Section 1947 of the Public Health Service Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of age, race, color, national origin, disability, sex, or religion in programs, services, and activities funded by Community Mental Health Services Block Grant and Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grants (42 USC § 300x-57).
The Family Violence Prevention and Services Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, disability, sex, or religion in programs, services, and activities funded under this Act (42 USC § 10406).
The Communications Act of 1934, as amended by Equal Employment Opportunity provisions, prohibits employment discrimination on the basis of age, race, color, religion, national origin, or sex by federally-funded public telecommunication entities (47 USC § 398).
Patient Visitation Rights prohibit religious discrimination in patient visitation at hospitals and long-term care facilities funded by Medicare and Medicaid (42 C.F.R. § 482.13(h), 42 C.F.R. § 483.10(f)(4)(vi)(C)).
Examples of incidents that may, depending on the specific facts and circumstances, raise concerns under these authorities:
An HHS-funded non-profit health clinic denies primary care services to any patient who identifies as a Jehovah’s Witness.
Hospital staff significantly delays treating a patient because the patient is wearing a necklace with a religious emblem.
A long-term care facility subjects residents of a certain religion to greater restrictions on religious/pastoral visitation than it imposes on residents of a different faith.
What can a person do if an individual experiences discrimination based on shared ancestry or ethnic characteristics?
Anyone who believes they have been discriminated against based on race, color, or national origin can file a complaint of discrimination with OCR. To file a complaint, visit: https://www.hhs.gov/civil-rights/filing-a-complaint/index.html.
Please note this resource does not have the force and effect of law. HHS’s enforcement of Title VI, 1557, and other laws cited in this bulletin stems from those laws and their implementing regulations.
A lock (LockA locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is responsible for enforcing protections against sex discrimination (including pregnancy, sexual orientation, and gender identity) under Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (Title IX) and Section 1557 of the Affordable Care Act (Section 1557).
The Title IX regulation generally provides that “no person shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination …” in education programs and activities. 45 C.F.R. § 86.31
The Section 1557 regulation extends the same protections to participants in health programs and activities, providing that covered entities may not discriminate on the basis of sex, among other grounds, in their health programs and activities.
It is well accepted among federal courts and agencies that discrimination on the basis of sex includes sex-based harassment when it is sufficiently serious to deny or limit an individual’s ability to participate in or benefit from the program at issue. Click here to read about sex-based harassment in the Department of Justice’s Title IX Manual.
Sex-based harassment includes sexual harassment (including sexual violence) and gender-based harassment.  The definitions below have been developed by the Office for Civil Rights at the U.S. Department of Education. Because of the overlap between Section 1557 and Title IX and to ensure consistency for entities covered by both statutes, these definitions will be used for both statutes to describe prohibited behavior.
Sexual harassment is unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature.  It includes unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal, nonverbal, or physical conduct of a sexual nature.  Sex-based harassment can happen to people and be perpetrated by people of any sex.
Sexual violence is a form of sexual harassment.  Sexual violence refers to physical sexual acts perpetrated against a person's will or where a person is incapable of giving consent (e.g., due to the victim's age or use of drugs or alcohol, or because an intellectual or other disability prevents the victim from having the capacity to give consent).  A number of different acts fall into the category of sexual violence, including rape, sexual assault, sexual battery, sexual abuse, and sexual coercion.
Gender-based harassment is unwelcome conduct based on an individual's actual or perceived sex.  It includes slurs, taunts, stereotypes, or name-calling as well as gender-motivated physical threats, attacks, or other hateful conduct.
Physician at a health center in a university engages in inappropriate touching of female students and others who receive examinations.
Professor sexually assaults male students during research internship in an isolated setting, requiring them to share a bedroom.
Hospital denies student an internship in its training and outreach program after an initial interview.  Supervisor of internships remarked to colleagues that the student did not look sufficiently feminine for the role.
Male Primary Investigator in research lab demeans and calls out the mistakes of female employees of the lab, but not of male employees who make similar errors.  Women are not promoted into supervisory positions under the Primary Researcher.  He also makes sexually inappropriate remarks about female researchers at a laboratory that was being considered for collaboration.
Title IX requires recipients to respond to sex-based harassment that is sufficiently serious to deny or limit the ability of students or employees to participate in or benefit from the covered entities’ educational programs and activities (e.g., creates a hostile environment).  Section 1557 similarly requires covered entities to respond to sex-based harassment in its health programs and activities, which may include harassment of non-students and non-employees in health programs operated by a university or college.
As the Department of Education has noted, when a recipient “knows or reasonably should know of possible sex-based harassment, it must take immediate and appropriate steps to investigate or otherwise determine what occurred. If an investigation reveals that the harassment created a hostile environment, the [recipient] must take prompt and effective steps reasonably calculated to end the harassment, eliminate the hostile environment, prevent its recurrence, and, as appropriate, remedy its effects.” To read the Department of Education Frequently Asked Questions, click here.
OCR investigates and resolves complaints of sexual harassment in the education and health programs of recipients of grants or other federal financial assistance from HHS.  Information about filing a civil rights complaint can be found here.  OCR also has the authority to initiate compliance reviews of covered entities in the absence of a complaint when credible information exists that a covered entity is operating in violation of Title IX or Section 1557.
OCR will analyze information from the complaint to ensure that it has jurisdiction.  If OCR does not have jurisdiction and jurisdiction lies with another agency, OCR will forward the complaint to that agency.  If the complainant is an employee of a covered entity and is alleging sex discrimination by another employee or supervisor, OCR generally will forward the complaint to the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission for investigation.  OCR generally will retain an employment complaint for investigation if the allegations include either (1) a pattern or practice of sexual harassment in the employment context, or (2) discrimination in employment and other practices of the covered entity.
If a complainant has questions about whether OCR is the right agency with which to file a complaint, he or she should proceed through OCR’s complaint process, which will ask questions to determine jurisdiction.  In addition, after the complaint is filed, the complainant will receive a letter informing them of whether OCR has jurisdiction or if the complaint is being forwarded to another federal agency.
It is unlawful for a covered entity to retaliate against a person for filing a complaint about sexual harassment or any other sex-based discrimination. If any retaliation is alleged, OCR will investigate that issue in addition to the original allegations in the complaint.
In addition, during the complaint process, OCR will seek the complainant’s consent to reveal his/her identity or identifying information, if necessary, to investigate the complaint.  Consent is voluntary, and it is not always needed to investigate a complaint.  Failure to provide consent, however, may make it difficult to investigate some aspects of the complaint.
When OCR identifies a violation or concern, it will work with the covered entity to achieve compliance with the law.  Depending on the scope of the changes required, complaints can be resolved through voluntary compliance letters or agreements requiring a change in policies, monitoring, notification, training, and how incidents are addressed, including incidents from the complaint. If voluntary compliance cannot be achieved, OCR can issue a formal findings letter and refer the case to the Department of Justice or begin administrative proceedings to revoke federal funds.
This content is in the process of Section 508 review. If you need immediate assistance accessing this content, please submit a request to OCRMail@hhs.gov. Content will be updated pending the outcome of the Section 508 review.
A lock (LockA locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Civil rights are personal rights guaranteed and protected by the U.S. Constitution and federal laws enacted by Congress, such as the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. Civil rights include protection from unlawful discrimination.
"Vital documents" are generally documents that affect access to, retention in, or termination or exclusion from a recipient’s program services or benefits.
If you feel a health care provider, human services agency, or program or activity conducted by HHS has discriminated against you (or someone else) unlawfully, you may file a civil rights compliant with OCR.
If you believe you have been discriminated against because of race, color, national origin, age, disability, religion, or sex (including pregnancy, sexual orientation, and gender identity) by a state and local social and health services agency, hospital, clinic, nursing home, or other HHS entity, you may file a complaint with OCR. Disability discrimination complaints may also be filed with OCR.
You may file electronically via the OCR Complaint Portal or use the Civil Rights Discrimination Complaint Form Package from OCR. You will need to save the PDF forms to your computer or other storage device. See full answer for instructions on filing a written complaint.Read the full answer
Complaints must be filed within 180 days from the date of the alleged discrimination. (The Office for Civil Rights may extend this period if there is good cause.)
You can file your complaint against an HHS entity via the OCR Complaint Portal, at OCRComplaint@hhs.gov, or you can mail or fax your complaint. See Filing a Complaint for more information.
Any individual or organization can file a civil rights complaint; you do not need to be the victim of discrimination in order to file a complaint, so long as the complaint is against an entity that is covered by one of the civil rights laws that OCR enforces and the complaint is on a basis covered by those laws, e.g., race, color, national origin, sex (including pregnancy, sexual orientation, and gender identity), age, or disability.
Yes, the HHS Office for Civil Rights can investigate such complaints if certain conditions are met. Read the full answer
No. The HHS Office for Civil Rights (OCR) is a neutral fact-finding agency. You should consult an attorney as soon as possible about your right to file a private lawsuit in court if you wish to protect fully your individual rights and remedies. Read the full answer
In most cases, yes. Under most of the statutes enforced by the HHS Office for Civil Rights (OCR), a complainant who has been discriminated against may initiate private court action instead of, or in addition to, filing a complaint with OCR. To do so, you should consult an attorney as soon as possible.
The HHS Office for Civil Rights will try to identify the appropriate federal agency and refer your case unless you advise us not to.
Once a complaint is received, OCR must determine if it has the legal authority to review and investigate the complaint. OCR’s primary authority is over certain health and human services entities only. Information is then gather in an investigation, and we will issue a closure letter, which presents OCR's decision on whether there has been a violation of a federal statute or regulation. If there is a violation finding, the recipient must take corrective action.
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 is a federal law that protects persons from unlawful discrimination based on race, color, or national origin in programs and activities that receive federal financial assistance. Recipients of federal financial assistance are covered by Title VI and its implementing regulations. This means that such recipients may not treat people differently on the basis of race, color, or national origin or use criteria or methods of administration that have the effect of discriminating against persons on the basis of their race, color, or national origin.
"Federal financial assistance” is assistance in the form of any grant, loan, or contract (other than a contract of insurance or guaranty). See the full answer for details.Read the full answer
403-Are Medicaid the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP, and Medicare considered Federal financial assistance
Medicaid and CHIP are considered federal financial assistance. Medicare Part A is also considered federal financial assistance.  However, the receipt of Medicare Part B is not considered federal financial assistance. Medicare Part C and Part D are considered federal financial assistance.
HHS’s LEP policy guidance implements a provision of Executive Order 13166, Improving Access to Services for Persons With Limited English Proficiency, that directs Federal agencies to work to ensure that recipients of their funds provide meaningful access to LEP customers.
405-Must Medicaid CHIP and Medicare Part A providersoffering Medicare Part C and Part D plans provide interpreters
Under Title VI and its implementing regulations, recipients of federal financial assistance must take reasonable steps to ensure meaningful access to their programs, services, and activities by eligible limited English proficient (LEP) persons. See the full answer for details.Read the full answer
Federal funding to help states and health providers pay for language services is primarily available through Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP).Read the full answer
The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) is not a government agency, and it decides what issues to become involved in on a case-by-case basis. “Civil liberties” encompasses many more rights than those enforced by the HHS Office for Civil Rights. It also concerns freedom of speech, association, and religion. For further information, call the local ACLU office in your area.
OCR enforces laws prohibiting discrimination on the basis of disability, age, race, color, national origin, religion, and sex (including pregnancy, sexual orientation, and gender identity) in the provision of health and social services only. OCR can investigate only matters that are covered by the laws it enforces.
Most employment discrimination complaints, especially those against private employers, should be addressed to the local Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) that services your state.
HHS’s LEP guidance identifies criteria that its recipients can use to assess whether they are operating their programs in compliance with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The LEP guidance also identifies specific actions recipients can take to improve access by persons with LEP to their programs and activities, such as providing interpreters and translating important documents. The guidance is also a resource to members of the public who want to learn more about steps that health and human providers can take to make their programs accessible to persons with LEP.Read the full answer
Additionally, TANF agencies are typically part of state or local governments and must comply with Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
603-What are a TANF agency's obligations with not discriminating on the basis of race, color, or national origin
TANF agencies are required to ensure that their programs do not discriminate against people on the basis of their race, color, or national origin. Read the full answer
No. TANF agencies have the same legal obligations to comply with Title VI, Section 504, the ADA, the Age Discrimination Act, and Title IX that they had prior to the DRA and its changes to TANF.
Under Section 504 and the ADA, TANF agencies must: (1) ensure equal access to people with disabilities; (2) reasonably modify policies, practices, and procedures for people with disabilities where necessary; and (3) ensure that methods of administration do not discriminate on the basis of disability.
Under Title VI regulations, to avoid discrimination on the basis of national origin, TANF agencies must take reasonable steps to provide meaningful access for people with limited English proficiency (LEP). Since every TANF agency serves a different population, TANF agency obligations to people with LEP may vary. Read the full answer
608-How can a TANF agency reasonably modify its policies, practices, and procedures for people with disabilities
Sometimes people with disabilities are unable to participate in or benefit from a TANF program without modifications to policies, practices, and procedures. Under Section 504 and the ADA, TANF agencies must reasonably modify policies, practices, and procedures to avoid discrimination on the basis of disability, unless the modification would fundamentally alter the nature of the service, program or activity.Read the full answer
Yes. Section 504 and the ADA require nondiscriminatory treatment of people with disabilities by TANF agencies. By focusing on what applicants and beneficiaries with disabilities need in order to move from government dependency to self-sufficiency, TANF agencies can ensure compliance with civil rights laws. If a TANF client with a disability needs a program modification or accommodation and providing the modification means that the State will not be able to count the person in its Federal work participation rate, the State is still obligated to provide the program modification.
To ensure that its methods of administration are not discriminatory, a TANF agency may develop and implement official written policies related to meeting the needs of people with disabilities, as well as actual practices (i.e., ways of ensuring that TANF agency staff are knowledgeable about policies) to meet the needs of people with disabilities.Read the full answer
Section 504 and the ADA define the terms "handicap" or "disability" with respect to an individual to mean a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such an individual. Included in the definition are people who have a record of such an impairment, or are regarded as having such an impairment.Read the full answer
For further information on TANF agency civil rights compliance and meeting the needs of TANF applicants and beneficiaries with disabilities or limited English proficiency, please contact the Office for Civil Rights or your regional TANF program manager in the HHS Administration for Children and Families, Office of Family Assistance.
506-I have a complaint against a major university and was told by OCR to file with the U.S. Department of Education
Generally, HHS does not investigate educational institutions unless the complaint is against a health-related portion of the university (e.g., the university's school of medicine). Several departments could have provided federal financial assistance to that university. We coordinate with other agencies to determine the most appropriate agency to handle your complaint.
No. Since its enactment, Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 has prohibited discrimination on the basis of race, color or national origin in any program or activity that receives Federal financial assistance. Read the full answer
Covered entities include any state or local agency, private institution or organization, or any public or private individual that (1) operates, provides or engages in health, or social service programs and activities, and (2) receives Federal financial assistance from HHS directly or through another recipient/covered entity. Read the full answer
Small practitioners and providers will have considerable flexibility in determining precisely how to fulfill their obligations to take reasonable steps to provide meaningful access for persons with limited English proficiency. OCR will assess compliance on a case by case basis.Read the full answer
706-Can a covered entity comply with Title VI if its program does not falls outside circumstances outlined in the guidance
No. The circumstances outlined in the guidance are intended to identify circumstances which amount to a "safe harbor" for recipients who desire greater certainty of Title VI compliance by translating their written documents, including written information posted to their websites.Read the full answer
Depending on the circumstances, it is often not in the best interest of the person being served to use a family member or friend to interpret important and possibly confidential information. When interpreter services are necessary in order for a recipient to comply with Title VI, the interpreter must be competent and provided at no cost to the person being served.Read the full answer
Privacy Act notice and confidentiality rules are in place. In Office for Civil Rights (OCR) investigations, the name of the complainant usually is kept confidential unless its disclosure is necessary to the case. If OCR determines that release of your identity is required for the processing of the case, you will be asked to sign a release. If you choose not to provide a release, the investigation may be impeded or stopped.
711-How do literacy issues, vision or hearing impairment among LEP populations affect recipient's responsiblities
In the case of LEP persons, a recipient is required to take reasonable steps to provide meaningful access to its programs and activities. In the case of LEP persons that are blind or deaf, under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, recipients must provide equal access through auxiliary aids and services.Read the full answer
OCR provides substantial technical assistance to recipient/covered entities seeking to ensure that LEP persons can meaningfully access their programs or services.Read the full answer
The requirement to take reasonable steps to provide meaningful access to LEP persons is enforced by OCR through the procedures identified in the Title VI implementing regulations. These procedures include complaint investigations, compliance reviews, efforts to secure voluntary compliance, and technical assistance.
A TANF agency ensures equal access to TANF applicants and beneficiaries with disabilities by delivering services that: (a) are appropriate in view of their particular physical or mental impairment; and (b) provide an equal opportunity to benefit from the agency's job placement, education, skills training, employment, and other TANF activities.Read the full answer
HHS agencies provide a variety of services for LEP persons. These services include oral language assistance services such as language lines and interpreters; translation of written materials; and foreign language web sites. HHS continues to explore how it can share language assistance measures, resources, cost-containment approaches, and other information and knowledge, developed with respect to its own federally conducted programs and activities, and welcomes any suggestions.
No. OCR enforces Title VI in accordance with the Title VI implementing regulations. The methods and procedures used to investigate and resolve complaints, and conduct compliance reviews, have not changed.
A lock (LockA locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) complies with applicable Federal civil rights laws and does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, religion, or sex (including pregnancy, sexual orientation, and gender identity). HHS does not exclude people or treat them differently because of race, color, national origin, age, disability, religion, or sex (including pregnancy, sexual orientation, and gender identity).
If you believe that HHS has failed to provide these services or discriminated in another way on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, or sex, you can file a grievance with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office for Civil Rights, electronically through the Office for Civil Rights Complaint Portal, or by mail or phone at:
Due to aggressive automated scraping of FederalRegister.gov and eCFR.gov, programmatic access to these sites is limited to access to our extensive developer APIs.
If you are human user receiving this message, we can add your IP address to a set of IPs that can access FederalRegister.gov & eCFR.gov; complete the CAPTCHA (bot test) below and click "Request Access". This process will be necessary for each IP address you wish to access the site from, requests are valid for approximately one quarter (three months) after which the process may need to be repeated.
If you want to request a wider IP range, first request access for your current IP, and then use the "Site Feedback" button found in the lower left-hand side to make the request.
) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Some files associated with previous administrations have been moved to the Archive section of the Department website.
Due to aggressive automated scraping of FederalRegister.gov and eCFR.gov, programmatic access to these sites is limited to access to our extensive developer APIs.
If you are human user receiving this message, we can add your IP address to a set of IPs that can access FederalRegister.gov & eCFR.gov; complete the CAPTCHA (bot test) below and click "Request Access". This process will be necessary for each IP address you wish to access the site from, requests are valid for approximately one quarter (three months) after which the process may need to be repeated.
If you want to request a wider IP range, first request access for your current IP, and then use the "Site Feedback" button found in the lower left-hand side to make the request.
If you believe your school, college, or university has violated Title IX, learn more about how to file a complaint with the Department’s Office for Civil Rights. Technical assistance inquiries, including questions regarding compliance with the new Title IX Rule, may be submitted to: OCR@ed.gov.
Survivors are in the position of control to decide what happens after an incident of sexual harassment, including sexual assault, occurs.
Schools must respect a survivor’s decision to file, or not to file, a formal complaint and must offer supportive measures either way.
Schools must respond promptly in every instance by offering to provide supportive measures like dorm reassignments or class schedule adjustments
Schools are forbidden from pressuring a survivor into filing or not filing a formal complaint or participating in a grievance process.
To protect younger students, K-12 schools must respond promptly when any school employee has notice of sexual harassment, including sexual assault.
The regulation extends to all aspects of a school’s education program or activity and applies to any building owned or controlled by a student organization recognized by a college or university.
If a survivor chooses to participate in a grievance process, the regulation protects survivors from inappropriately being asked about prior sexual history (also known as “rape shield” protections), and the survivor must not be required to divulge any medical, psychological, or similarly privileged records.
A survivor never has to come face-to-face with the accused during a hearing, and an accused is never allowed to personally ask questions of a survivor.
Survivors are protected against retaliation when they choose to report sexual misconduct or not, file a formal complaint or not, participate in a grievance process or not.
The regulation provides students with a right to written notice of allegations, the right to an advocate, and the right to submit, examine, and challenge evidence.
All students have the right to an impartial finding based on evidence using a standard of evidence — either the preponderance of evidence standard or the clear and convincing standard — that applies to all members of the school community, including faculty.
<>/Metadata 32 0 R/Names 229 0 R/PageLayout/OneColumn/Pages 182 0 R/StructTreeRoot 45 0 R/Type/Catalog/ViewerPreferences<>>>
<</BitsPerComponent 8/ColorSpace/DeviceGray/DecodeParms<</BitsPerComponent 8/Colors 1/Columns 178>>/Filter/FlateDecode/Height 178/Length 11600/Name/X/Subtype/Image/Type/XObject/Width 178>>stream
<</BitsPerComponent 8/ColorSpace/DeviceRGB/DecodeParms<</BitsPerComponent 8/Colors 3/Columns 178>>/Filter/FlateDecode/Height 178/Length 33328/Name/X/SMask 207 0 R/Subtype/Image/Type/XObject/Width 178>>stream
<</DA(/Helv 0 Tf 0 g )/DR<</Encoding<</PDFDocEncoding 251 0 R>>/Font<</Helv 226 0 R/ZaDb 227 0 R>>>>/Fields[]>>
<</BaseFont/BYTRUG+Arial/CIDSystemInfo 234 0 R/CIDToGIDMap/Identity/DW 1000/FontDescriptor 235 0 R/Subtype/CIDFontType2/Type/Font/W[0[750 0]2 4 278 5[355]6 7 556 8[889 667 191]11 12 333 13[389 584 278 333]17 18 278 19 28 556 29 30 278 31 33 584 34[556 1015]36 37 667 38 39 722 40[667 611 778 722 278 500 667 556 833 722 778 667 778 722 667 611 722 667 944]59 60 667 61[611]62 64 278 65[469 556 333]68 69 556 70[500]71 72 556 73[278]74 75 556 76 77 222 78[500 222 833]81 84 556 85[333 500 278 556 500 722]91 93 500 94[334 260 334 584]98 99 667 100[722 667 722 778 722]105 110 556 111[500]112 115 556 116 119 278 120 130 556 131[400]132 134 556 135[350 537 611]138 139 737 141 142 333 143[549]145[778 713]147 149 549 150[556 576 494 713 823 549 274 370 365 768 889]161 162 611 163[333 584 549 556 549 612]169 170 556 172 173 667 174[778]176[944 556]179 180 333 181 182 222 183[549 494 500 667 167 556]189 190 333 191 192 500 193[556 278 222 333]198 202 667 203 206 278 207 209 778 210 212 722 213[278]214 223 333 224[556 222 667 500 611 500 260 722 556 667 500 667 556]237 238 584 239 241 333 242 244 834 245[556 778 556 278 667 500 722 500 722 500 556 552 333 667 556 667 556 722 615 722 667 556 667]268 269 556 270[222 556 292 556 334 722 556 722 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 667 500 611 278 611 375 722 556 722 556 611 500 611 500 551 778 798 578 557 446 617 395 648 552 500 365 1094]313[500]315[500]317 318 500 319[979 719 583 604 584]324 325 604 326[708 625]328 372 708 373[729 604]376 379 990 380 382 604 383[1021 1052 917]386 387 750 388[531 656 594 510 500 750 735 444 604 188 354 885 323 604]402 403 354 404[604 354 667 556 722 500 722 500 667 556 667 556 667 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 722 556 722 556]428 434 278 435[222 500 222 667]439 440 500 441[556 222 722 556 723 556 778 556 778 556 722 333 667 500 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 944 722 667 500 222 667 556]473[889 778 611 278 944 722 944 722 944 722 667 500 222 333 556 600]489 492 834 493 496 333 497[667 784 838 384 774 855 752 222]505 506 667 507[668 667 611 722 278 667 668 833 722 650 778 722 667 618 611]522 523 667 524[835 748 278 667 578 446 556 222 547 575 500 441]536 537 556 538[222]539 540 500 541[576 500 448 556 569 482 547 525 713 781 222 547 556 547 781 667 865 542 719 667]561 562 278 563[500 1057 1010 854 583 635 719 667 656 667 542 677 667 923 604]578 579 719 580[583 656 833 722 778 719 667 722 611 635 760 667 740 667 917 938 792 885 656 719 1010 722 556 573 531 365 583 556 669 458]610 611 559 612[438 583 688 552 556 542 556 500 458 500 823 500 573 521 802 823 625 719 521 510 750 542]634 635 556 636[365 510 500 222 278 222 906 813 556 438 500 552 489 411]651[1073 690]653 665 0 666[383 0 275]669 670 0 671[278 563 542 399 508 602 247 382 599 590 247 509 461 463 599 601 247 353 574 529 566 546 461 479 550 509 694 643]699 701 493 702[236 417 815 247]706 707 509 708 709 463 710[535]711 714 694 715 717 563 718[542 399 508 602 287 411 590 287 509 461 463 601 353 574 566 546 479 550 509 694 643 247 542 461 546 576]744 747 0 748 749 319 750[356 413 207]753 760 0 761 771 526 772[319 526]774 775 750 776[282 750]778 780 526 781 785 750 786[0]787 794 750 795[638]796 798 750 799 800 713 801 802 244 803 806 750 807[563 526]809 810 530 811 812 489 813[812 933 394 515 812 933 394 515 638 588 375]824 838 750 839 843 0 844 845 750 846 861 0 862[556]864 891 750 892 893 319 894[750 616 413 207 229 207 229]901 902 432 903[207 229 638 588]907 908 244 909[207 229]911 912 713 913 914 244 915[282 375]917 918 713 919 920 244 921 922 713 923 924 244 925[563 526]927 928 530 929[563 526]931 932 530 933[563 526]935 936 530 937 940 337 941 944 489 945 946 821 947 948 531 949 950 821 951 952 531 953 954 1098 955 956 846 957 958 1098 959 960 846 961 968 582 969[544 450 526 394 544 450 526 394]977 978 789 979[268 263]981 982 582 983[268 263]985 986 601 987 988 394 989 990 506 991 992 207 993 994 338 995 996 394 997 998 526 999 1000 244 1001[282 375 450 394]1005 1006 432 1007[638 588 638 588]1011 1012 244 1013[544 601 544 601 544 601 544 601]1021 1022 750 1023 1024 0 1025 1027 750 1028 1029 0 1030 1031 750 1032 1033 0 1034 1036 750 1037 1042 0 1043[750]1044 1045 0 1046 1099 750 1100 1102 319 1103 1126 750 1127[125]1129[2000 857 656 854 669]1134 1149 0 1150[513]1151 1152 834 1153 1186 0 1187[222 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 278 222 278 222 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 857 656 857 656 857 656 857 656 857 656 722 556 722 556 854 669 854 669 854 669 854 669 854 669 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 556 278 222 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556]1292 1295 0 1296[542 365 923 669 583 438 583 438 722 552 556 500 556 500 667 500 667 521 667 556 752 556 778 556 713 244 268 263 582]1325 1330 244 1331[269]1332 1333 0 1334 1335 333 1336 1339 0 1340[207 229 207 229 207 229 207 229]1348 1351 432 1352[638 588]1354 1355 713 1356 1357 244 1358 1359 713 1360 1361 244 1362 1363 713 1364 1365 244 1366 1367 713 1368 1369 244 1370 1371 713 1372 1373 244 1374 1375 713 1376 1377 244 1378 1379 713 1380 1381 244 1382[563 526]1384 1385 530 1386[563 526]1388 1389 530 1390[563 526]1392 1393 530 1394[563 526]1396 1397 530 1398[563 526]1400 1401 530 1402[563 526]1404 1405 530 1406 1423 337 1424 1439 489 1440 1441 821 1442 1443 531 1444 1445 821 1446 1447 531 1448 1449 821 1450 1451 531 1452 1453 1098 1454 1455 846 1456 1457 1098 1458 1459 846 1460 1461 582 1462[544 450 526 394]1466 1468 789 1469[268 263]1471 1472 789 1473[268 263]1475 1476 789 1477[268 263]1479 1480 789 1481[268 263]1483 1484 789 1485[268 263]1487 1490 582 1491 1492 1155 1493 1494 906 1495[812 933 394 515]1499 1500 601 1501 1502 394 1503 1504 601 1505 1506 394 1507 1508 601 1509 1510 394 1511[812 933 394 515 812 933 394 515 812 933 394 515 812 933 394 515 812 933 394 515]1531 1532 506 1533 1534 207 1535 1536 506 1537 1538 207 1539 1540 506 1541 1542 207 1543 1544 506 1545 1546 207 1547 1548 526 1549 1550 244 1551 1556 526 1557 1558 244 1559 1560 526 1561[563 526]1563 1564 530 1565[282 375]1567 1569 388 1570 1585 432 1586[638 588 638 588]1590 1591 244 1592 1593 432 1594[638 588]1596 1597 244 1598[638 588]1600 1603 812 1604[207]1605 1611 0 1612[1123 1084]1614 1619 0 1620[194 370]1622 1623 0 1624[600]1625 1627 0 1628 1629 821 1630 1631 531 1632 1633 1098 1634 1635 846 1636[544 450 526 394 413 338 282 244 320]1645 1649 244 1650[812 933 247 0 342 493 544 601 544 601 544 601 544 601 544 601 544 601 544 601]1670 1671 526 1672[544 601 556 758 656 556 656 556]1680 1681 722 1682[500 722 810 656 556 557 667 604 611 778 624 881 222 278 667 500 222 500 891 722 556 778 868 667 754 556]1708 1709 667 1710[500 618 380 278 611 278 611 748 722 772 500 611 500]1723 1724 611 1725 1726 545 1727 1728 556 1729[458 487 556 260 413 584 278 1333 1222 1049 1062 833 451 1222 944 771 556 667 556 0 667 556]1752[889 778 556 778 556 667 500 778 556 778 556 611 545 222 1333 1222 1049 778 556 1034 618 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556]1783 1786 278 1787[778 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 722 556 722 556 667 500 611 278 545 437 722 556 706 604 565 611 500 667 556 667 556 778 556 0 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 500]1827 1830 556 1831 1832 500 1833 1835 556 1836[739]1837 1838 458 1839[631 507 278]1842 1843 556 1844[559 501 617]1847 1849 556 1850 1851 222 1852[356 327 304 222 572]1857 1859 833 1860 1861 556 1862[553 556 791 781 550]1867 1873 333 1874 1875 542 1876[500 222 260 222 349]1881 1882 278 1883[556 568 547 500 722 500 520 500 541]1892 1893 545 1894 1897 500 1898[778 531 507 559 552 397 500 404 556]1907 1908 500 1909[964 906 1005 712 429 719 764 661 632 485 527]1920 1921 383 1922[159]1923 1925 240 1926[364 481 321 191 355]1931 1933 222 1934 1935 333 1936 1937 349 1938 1941 584 1942 1948 333 1949 1950 278 1951 1958 333 1959[322 157 340 328 349]1964 1968 383 1969 1973 333 1974 1982 542 1983[383]1984 1988 542 1989[383]1990 1994 542 1995[383]1996 2000 542 2001[383]2002 2006 542 2007[383]2008 2016 542 2017[383]2018 2022 542 2023[383]2024 2028 542 2029[383]2030 2034 542 2035[383]2036 2040 542 2041[383]2042 2050 542 2051[383]2052 2056 542 2057[383]2058 2062 542 2063[383]2064 2068 542 2069[383]2070 2074 542 2075[383]2076 2084 542 2085[383]2086 2090 542 2091[383]2092 2096 542 2097[383]2098 2102 542 2103[383]2104 2108 542 2109[383]2110 2113 542 2114 2204 0 2205 2207 333 2208[575 547 772 958 772 560 781 601 778 556 722 500 611 404 625 529 756 577 891 833 674 556 674 500]2232 2233 667 2234[609 596 737 554 464 410 601 573 500 222 778]2245 2246 442 2247[667 719 556 559 1338 624 778 613 950 713 668 500 897 695 829 685 1053 867 604 458 796 688 778 556 803 631 803 631 1074 896 833 612 1191 852 0 1338 624 722 500 503]2287 2292 0 2293[719 559 656 521 667 556 670 549 604 458 583 438 742 536 879 648 1137 870 753 521 722 500 611 458 925 691 667 521 861 666 861 666 278 923 669 667 551 656 583 722 552 722 552 667 521 833 688 333 667 556 667 556]2346[889 667 556 752 556 923 669 604 458 604 545 719 559 719 559 778 556 778 556 719 510 635 500 635 500 635 500 667 521 885 719 656 556 968 876 956 815 663 509 970 910 1034 878 778 559 747 666]2393 2430 0 2431[667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 722 500 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 611 278 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 278 222]2477 2478 278 2479[667 500 667 500 667 500 556 222 556 222 556 222 556 222]2493 2498 833 2499[722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 556 667 556 722 333 722 333 722 333 722 333 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 278 611 278 611 278 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 500 667 500 944 722 944 722 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 500 611 500 611 500 556 278 722 500 556 222]2581 2588 578 2589 2590 667 2591 2596 813 2597 2602 446 2603 2604 765 2605 2608 928 2609 2616 556 2617 2618 820 2619 2624 1015 2625 2632 222 2633 2634 375 2635 2640 571 2641 2646 556 2647 2648 827 2649 2650 1022 2651 2652 973 2653 2660 547 2661[813 960 1009 960]2665 2672 781 2673 2674 796 2675 2676 992 2677 2680 943 2681 2682 578 2683 2684 446 2685 2686 556 2687 2688 222 2689 2690 556 2691 2692 547 2693 2694 781 2695 2702 578 2703 2704 667 2705 2710 813 2711 2718 556 2719 2720 820 2721 2726 1015 2727 2734 781 2735 2736 796 2737 2738 992 2739 2742 943 2743 2749 578 2750 2754 667 2755 2759 333 2760 2764 556 2765 2766 813 2767 2768 869 2769[722]2770 2772 333 2773 2778 222 2779 2780 278 2781 2782 424 2783 2785 333 2786 2789 547 2790 2791 569 2792 2793 547 2794 2795 667 2796[862 887 765]2799 2801 333 2802 2806 781 2807[924 827 894 796 748]2812 2813 333 2814[556]2815 2816 722 2817[833 722 1164 944 667 611]2824[500 594]2826 2829 0 2830 2831 222 2832[521 667 682 349 685 367]2838 2839 687 2840 2848 333 2849[278]2850 2853 333 2854 2855 397 2856[333]2857 2867 0 2868[667 556 496 748 889 531 500]2875 2876 551 2877[490 458 222 422 500 401 688 559 556 500]2887 2889 608 2890[944 457]2892 2893 556 2894[521]2895 2896 542 2897[458 547 597 733 597 500 722 500 458 427 607 365 500 542 521 713 583 453 664]2916 2917 415 2918[449]2919 2920 410 2921[496 429 167 314 425 352 510 430 429 512 382 418 451 433 429 623]2937 2938 372 2939[377 600]2941 2942 377 2943 2944 372 2945 2946 318 2947[377 157 339 573 382 377 354]2954 2955 377 2956[378 220 382 407 573 321 391 385 321 378 440 343 157 240 382 321 385 321 379 440 343 936 1300 439 1273 657 239 544]2984 2992 0 2993 2994 337 2995 2996 489 2997[450 394 450 394 709 655 749 607 609 745 656 789 584]3010 3012 0 3013[556 333 354]3016 3019 207 3020[793 1221 500]3024[500]3026[333 250 167 556 278 200 83 0 737 722 833 688 908]3039 3040 887 3041[667 722 500 556 611]3046 3047 500 3048[581]3049 3053 0 3054[569]3055 3057 722 3058[542 365]3060 3062 0 3063[353 0 263 289]3067 3073 0 3074 3075 713 3076 3077 244 3078 3079 713 3080 3081 244 3082 3083 713 3084 3085 244 3086 3087 713 3088 3089 244 3090 3091 713 3092 3093 244 3094 3095 713 3096 3097 244 3098 3099 713 3100 3101 244 3102[563 526]3104 3105 530 3106[563 526]3108 3109 530 3110 3113 337 3114 3115 489 3116 3117 821 3118 3119 531 3120[544 450 526 394 544 450 526 394 544 450 526 394]3132 3133 789 3134[268 263]3136 3137 789 3138[268 263 812 933 394 515 812 933 394 515 812 933 394 515]3152 3153 338 3154 3155 394 3156 3157 338 3158 3159 394 3160 3161 526 3162 3163 244 3164 3165 526 3166 3167 244 3168 3169 526 3170 3171 244 3172 3173 506 3174 3175 207 3176 3179 489 3180 3181 821 3182 3183 531 3184 3185 556 3186[278 833]3188 3189 556 3190 3191 333 3192[500 278 500 556 380 557 786]3199 3200 222 3201[556 547 568]3204 3205 556 3206[278 713 500 222 833]3211 3212 556 3213[333 500 387]3216 3218 500 3219 3222 556 3223 3224 458 3225[650 222 500 222 556 545 377 354 348 373 318]3236 3237 229 3238[377 383]3240 3243 157 3244[271]3245 3246 157 3247[275]3248 3249 572 3250 3252 382 3253[377 375 340 157 220 382 388 378 354 321]3263 3265 358 3266[369 364]3268 3271 0 3272[278]3273 3274 372 3275[377 328 372 778 667 556 722 333]3283 3290 578 3291 3298 222 3299 3306 547 3307 3310 222 3311 3314 547 3315[544 601 453 667 722 668 667 556 500 222 737 556 722 333 667]3330 3333 500 3334[222 542 365 667 500 667 500 604 458 656 583]3345 3353 0 3354[943 490 500 556 222 556 667 722 556 278 722 556 667 500 611]3369 3370 500 3371[577 425 648]3374 3379 0 3380[222 723 722 723]3384 3394 0 3395[778 556 944 722 703 0 732 597 1037 841 278 438]3407 3408 191 3409 3410 500 3411 3413 278 3414[333]3415 3422 0 3423[611]3424 3425 556 3426[384 539 534 556 539 561 519 556 559 556 387]3437 3440 556 3441[562 523 556 560 721 728 746 1161 746 376 657 778 556 222 496 255 556 289 559]3460 3461 556 3462[376 255 222 555 567 595 613 554 504 648 617 239 431 567 467 722 615 649 553 649 607 553 508 608 551 793 554 553 507 821 833 467 649 554 613 595]3498 3503 555 3504[595]3505 3508 554 3509 3512 239 3513[615]3514 3518 649 3519 3522 608 3523[553]3524 3526 555 3527 3530 595 3531 3532 613 3533 3537 554 3538 3541 648 3542[617 618]3544 3548 239 3549[658 431 567]3552 3555 467 3556 3558 615 3559[620]3560 3562 649 3563 3565 607 3566 3570 553 3571 3573 508 3574[507]3575 3580 608 3581 3584 793 3585 3587 553 3588 3590 507 3591[555 821 649 555 567 460 555 554 507 617 649 239 567 544 722 615 523 649 612 553 518 508 553 659 554 658 649 555 554 617 239 649 553 649 239 553 554 710 460 597 553]3632 3633 239 3634[431 869 839 731 511 548 612 555 565 567 460 551 554 791 515]3649 3650 612 3651[511 551 722 617 649 612 553 595 508 548 631 554 607 561 770 765 686 738 542 597 835 607 392]3674 3686 333 3687 3697 721 3698 3708 728 3709 3721 746 3722 3730 376 3731[511]3732 3734 376 3735 3736 255 3737[301 331 255]3740 3747 376 3748[657]3749 3757 556 3758[222 496]3760 3761 255 3762[301 331 255]3765 3766 289 3767[375 289]3769 3772 559 3773[578]3774 3777 333 3778 3780 616 3781[755 604 736]3784 3798 269 3799[1573 1756 0 1853]3803 3806 0 3807[563 526]3809 3810 530 3811[563 526]3813 3814 530 3815 3816 821 3817 3818 531 3819 3820 489 3821[563 526]3823 3824 530 3825[207 229 207 229 638 588]3831 3832 244 3833[638 588]3835 3836 244 3837[638 588]3839 3840 244 3841 3844 432 3845 3848 812 3849[563 526]3851 3852 530 3853 3854 821 3855 3856 531 3857 3858 821 3859 3860 531 3861 3862 601 3863 3864 394 3865[588 625 573 611 920 731 882 634 1464]3874 3878 0 3879[638 588]3881 3882 244 3883[812 933 394 515 812 933 394 515 638 588]3893 3894 244 3895[638 588]3897 3898 244 3899[638 588]3901 3902 244 3903[0 577 475 611 458 719 584 667 556 1300 556 667 960 760 788 718 958 856 667 500 1068 884 1132 851 722 542 705 554]3931 3932 278 3933[557 767 398 591 557 668 576 833 667 732 695 333 556 490 159 321 667 611 278 779 1417 1036 1381 1853]3957 3959 207 3960[229]3961 3964 207 3965[290]3966 3976 207 3977 3981 244 3982[272 244 200]3985 3986 343 3987[556]3988 3989 364 3990 3991 519 3992 3999 638 4000 4001 563 4002[487]4003 4004 563 4005[487]4006 4007 713 4008 4009 244 4010[563 526]4012 4013 530 4014 4017 582 4018 4019 789 4020[268 263]4022 4023 582 4024[268 263]4026 4027 506 4028 4029 207 4030 4031 338 4032 4033 394 4034[638 588]4036 4037 244 4038[638 588]4040 4041 244 4042 4043 464 4044 4045 432 4046 4047 427 4048 4074 0 4075[544 601 0 399 508 602 643]4082 4083 0 4084 4085 319 4086[533 530 533 530 533 530 534 533 530 582 319 394 273 185 0 793 739 725 716 718 725 709 598 724 807 716 659 528 924 767 695 616 706 718 700 754 716 708 700 725 699 792 738 764 725 698 660 678 677 516 762 686 782 762 274 222 169 200 265 231 514 833 551 580 583 553 550 492 551 667 580 551 220 834 542 553 551 523 553 559 551 220 553 456 551 347 833 517 564]4175 4176 551 4177[831 551 555 394 831 550 555 744 713 278 324]4188 4189 1001 4190[727]4191 4192 1104 4193[1102 1104 1385 556]4198 4199 0 4200 4201 713 4202 4203 244 4204[171]4205 4206 337 4207 4208 1098 4209 4210 846 4211[812 933 394 515 282 197]4217 4218 489 4219[0 500 722 552 1330 1069 667 565 656 583 830 786 534]4232 4233 753 4234[537 743 794 544 450 526 394]4241 4242 601 4243 4244 394 4245[0 278 209 278 209 722 556 830 627]4254 4255 552 4256 4257 516 4258 4259 586 4260[504 553 1155 912 1188 918 1020 890 962 734 962 734 962 734 722 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 651 310 556 222 802 611 878 651 1365 952 667 556 829 701 934 810 778 556 979 748 581 410]4304 4305 582 4306[667 500 944 722 549 494 667 556 667 556 509 408]4318 4319 445 4320 4321 501 4322 4323 561 4324[327 677 345 961 680 333 750 672 476 778 556 405 333]4337 4338 590 4339[578 556 222 800 599 405 333 644 500 722 444 767 601 722]4353 4354 500 4355[556 801 685 654 278 669 525 714 549 669 525 778 556 667 500 722 556 722 333 667 500 807 604 732 684 667 611 524 735 667 575 1003 781 770 448 639 833 611 667 833 278 1185 578 900 478 556 666 278 556 368 347 242 851 569 556]4410 4411 548 4412[611]4413 4415 944 4416 4417 952 4418[549 607 333 503 458 627 474 700 222]4427 4428 556 4429 4430 833 4431[613 525 613 594 604 500 604]4438 4439 500 4440[333 383 273 248 415 721 766 944 918 556 649 667 611]4453 4454 713 4455 4456 244 4457 4458 713 4459 4460 244 4461 4462 713 4463 4464 385 4465 4466 489 4467[638 588]4469 4470 244 4471 4472 789 4473[268 263]4475 4476 582 4477[268 263]4479 4480 526 4481 4482 244 4483 4499 0 4500[483]4501 4502 1057]>>
<</Ascent 1040/CIDSet 236 0 R/CapHeight 716/Descent -325/Flags 4/FontBBox[-665 -325 2000 1040]/FontFamily(Arial)/FontFile2 237 0 R/FontName/BYTRUG+Arial/FontStretch/Normal/FontWeight 400/ItalicAngle 0/StemV 88/Type/FontDescriptor/XHeight 519>>
<</EF<</F 250 0 R>>/F(qa-titleix-20200904.pdf.accreport.html)/Type/Filespec/UF(qa-titleix-20200904.pdf.accreport.html)>>
<</DL 8139/Filter/FlateDecode/Length 1940/Params<</CheckSum<B249DDDEEA85C401848A484DFAA861BA>/CreationDate(D:20220315135603-04'00')/ModDate(D:20220317105153-04'00')/Size 8139>>/Subtype/text#2Fhtml>>stream
<</Differences[24/breve/caron/circumflex/dotaccent/hungarumlaut/ogonek/ring/tilde 39/quotesingle 96/grave 128/bullet/dagger/daggerdbl/ellipsis/emdash/endash/florin/fraction/guilsinglleft/guilsinglright/minus/perthousand/quotedblbase/quotedblleft/quotedblright/quoteleft/quoteright/quotesinglbase/trademark/fi/fl/Lslash/OE/Scaron/Ydieresis/Zcaron/dotlessi/lslash/oe/scaron/zcaron 160/Euro 164/currency 166/brokenbar 168/dieresis/copyright/ordfeminine 172/logicalnot/.notdef/registered/macron/degree/plusminus/twosuperior/threesuperior/acute/mu 183/periodcentered/cedilla/onesuperior/ordmasculine 188/onequarter/onehalf/threequarters 192/Agrave/Aacute/Acircumflex/Atilde/Adieresis/Aring/AE/Ccedilla/Egrave/Eacute/Ecircumflex/Edieresis/Igrave/Iacute/Icircumflex/Idieresis/Eth/Ntilde/Ograve/Oacute/Ocircumflex/Otilde/Odieresis/multiply/Oslash/Ugrave/Uacute/Ucircumflex/Udieresis/Yacute/Thorn/germandbls/agrave/aacute/acircumflex/atilde/adieresis/aring/ae/ccedilla/egrave/eacute/ecircumflex/edieresis/igrave/iacute/icircumflex/idieresis/eth/ntilde/ograve/oacute/ocircumflex/otilde/odieresis/divide/oslash/ugrave/uacute/ucircumflex/udieresis/yacute/thorn/ydieresis]/Type/Encoding>>
<</DecodeParms<</Columns 5/Predictor 12>>/Filter/FlateDecode/ID[<6DC5CE5D65714540BB609992CB9144CF><02DADCDFA25DC74C8EE8A11639E8BA57>]/Info 185 0 R/Length 443/Root 187 0 R/Size 363/Type/XRef/W[1 3 1]>>stream
<rdf:li xml:lang="x-default">Questions and Answers Regarding the Department’s Final Title IX Rule (PDF)</rdf:li>
<</BaseFont/CCNSQU+Arial,Italic/DescendantFonts 455 0 R/Encoding/Identity-H/Subtype/Type0/ToUnicode 456 0 R/Type/Font>>
<</BaseFont/MPKXXV+Arial,Italic/DescendantFonts 447 0 R/Encoding/Identity-H/Subtype/Type0/ToUnicode 448 0 R/Type/Font>>
<</BaseFont/WEHNYB+Arial,Italic/DescendantFonts 439 0 R/Encoding/Identity-H/Subtype/Type0/ToUnicode 440 0 R/Type/Font>>
<</BaseFont/ZBTMKV+Arial,Italic/DescendantFonts 431 0 R/Encoding/Identity-H/Subtype/Type0/ToUnicode 432 0 R/Type/Font>>
<</BaseFont/EAALDL+Arial,Italic/DescendantFonts 423 0 R/Encoding/Identity-H/Subtype/Type0/ToUnicode 424 0 R/Type/Font>>
<</BaseFont/HWJPUF+Arial,Italic/DescendantFonts 415 0 R/Encoding/Identity-H/Subtype/Type0/ToUnicode 416 0 R/Type/Font>>
<</BaseFont/CECJYK+Arial,Italic/DescendantFonts 407 0 R/Encoding/Identity-H/Subtype/Type0/ToUnicode 408 0 R/Type/Font>>
<</BaseFont/KNDESU+Arial,Italic/DescendantFonts 399 0 R/Encoding/Identity-H/Subtype/Type0/ToUnicode 400 0 R/Type/Font>>
<</BaseFont/XMIWTU+Arial,Italic/DescendantFonts 391 0 R/Encoding/Identity-H/Subtype/Type0/ToUnicode 392 0 R/Type/Font>>
<</BaseFont/MDANCQ+Arial,Italic/DescendantFonts 383 0 R/Encoding/Identity-H/Subtype/Type0/ToUnicode 384 0 R/Type/Font>>
<</BaseFont/UZNRGA+Arial,Italic/DescendantFonts 375 0 R/Encoding/Identity-H/Subtype/Type0/ToUnicode 376 0 R/Type/Font>>
<</BaseFont/UZNRGA+Arial,Italic/CIDSystemInfo 378 0 R/CIDToGIDMap/Identity/DW 1000/FontDescriptor 379 0 R/Subtype/CIDFontType2/Type/Font/W[0[750 0]2 4 278 5[355]6 7 556 8[889 667 191]11 12 333 13[389 584 278 333]17 18 278 19 28 556 29 30 278 31 33 584 34[556 1015]36 37 667 38 39 722 40[667 611 778 722 278 500 667 556 833 722 778 667 778 722 667 611 722 667 944]59 60 667 61[611]62 64 278 65[469 556 333]68 69 556 70[500]71 72 556 73[278]74 75 556 76 77 222 78[500 222 833]81 84 556 85[333 500 278 556 500 722]91 93 500 94[334 260 334 584]98 99 667 100[722 667 722 778 722]105 110 556 111[500]112 115 556 116 119 278 120 130 556 131[400]132 134 556 135[350 537 611]138 139 737 141 142 333 143[549]145[778 713]147 149 549 150[556 576 494 713 823 549 274 370 365 768 889]161 162 611 163[333 584 549 556 549 612]169 170 556 172 173 667 174[778]176[944 556]179 180 333 181 182 222 183[549 494 500 667 167 556]189 190 333 191 192 500 193[556 278 222 333]198 202 667 203 206 278 207 209 778 210 212 722 213[278]214 223 333 224[556 222 667 500 611 500 260 722 556 667 500 667 556]237 238 584 239 241 333 242 244 834 245[556 778 556 278 667 500 722 500 722 500 556 552 333 667 556 667 556 722 625 722 667 556 667]268 269 556 270[222 556 281 556 400 722 556 722 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 667 500 611 278 611 354 722 556 722 556 611 500 611 500 570 778 837 570 556 439 603 374 652 552 500 365 1094]313[500]315[500]317 318 500 319[979 719 584 604 584]324 325 604 326[708 625]328 372 708 373[729 604]376 379 990 380 382 604 383[1021 1052 917]386 387 750 388[531 656 594 510 500 750 733 444 615 188 354 885 323 604]402 403 354 404[604 354 667 556 722 500 722 500 667 556 667 556 667 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 722 556 722 556 278 222 278 222 278 222 278 222 500 222 667]439 440 500 441[556 222 722 556 723 556 778 556 778 556 722 333 667 500 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 944 722 667 500 222 667 556]473[889 778 611 278 944 722 944 722 944 722 667 500 222 333 556 600]489 492 834 493 496 333 497[667 789 846 389 794 865 775 222]505 506 667 507[671 667 611 722 278]512 513 667 514[833 722 648 778 725 667 600 611]522 523 667 524[831 761 278 667 570 439 555 222 550 571 500 463 555 542 222 500 492 548 500 447 556 573 486 550 546 728 779 222 550 556 550 779 667 843 544 708 667]561 562 278 563[500 1066 982 844 589 639 724 667 651 667 544 704 667 917 614]578 579 715 580[589 686 833 722 778 725 667 722 611 639 795 667 727 673 920 923 805 886 651 694 1022 682 556 563 522 493 553 556 688 465]610 611 556 612[472 564 686 550 556 550 556 500 833 500 835 500 572 518 830 851 621 736 526 492 752 534]634 635 556 636[378 496 500]639 641 222 642[910 828 556 472 500 556 492 339]651[1083 670]653 665 0 666[383 0 275]669 670 0 671[278 563 542 399 508 602 247 382 599 590 247 509 461 463 599 601 247 353 574 529 566 546 461 479 550 509 694 643]699 701 493 702[236 417 815 247]706 707 509 708 709 463 710[535]711 714 694 715 717 563 718[542 399 508 602 287 411 590 287 509 461 463 601 353 574 566 546 479 550 509 694 643 247 542 461 546 576]744 763 0 764[556]766[812 604 793 634]770 785 0 786[513]787 788 834 789 822 0 823[222 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 278 222 278 222 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 812 604 812 604 812 604 812 604 812 604 722 556 722 556 793 634 793 634 793 634 793 634 793 634 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 556 278 222 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556]928 931 0 932[544 378 917 688 589 472 589 472 722 550 556 500 556 500 667 500 673 518 673 556 778 556 778 556 247 0 342 493 556 730 651 556 651 556]966 967 722 968[500 722 784 651]972 973 556 974[667 614 611 778 497 879 222 278 667 500 222 492 846 722 556 778 868 667 730 556]994 995 667 996[500 600 333 278 611 278 611 761 722 717 500 611 500]1009 1010 611 1011 1012 500 1013[556 510 438 500 556 260 413 584 278 1333 1222]1024 1025 1056 1026[778 444 1222 944 778 556 667 556 0 667 556]1038[889 778 556 778 556 667 500 778 556 778 556 611 500 222 1333 1222 1056 778 556 1034 618 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556]1069 1072 278 1073[778 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 722 556 722 556 667 500 611 278 545 437 722 556 669]1094 1095 604 1096[611 500 667 556 667 556 778 556 0 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 500]1113 1116 556 1117 1118 500 1119 1121 556 1122[704 439 465 616 509 278]1128 1129 556 1130[550 501 617]1133 1135 556 1136 1137 222 1138[356]1139 1141 222 1142[563]1143 1145 833 1146 1147 556 1148[583 556 766 779 556]1153 1159 333 1160 1161 534 1162[500 291 305 290 348]1167 1168 278 1169[556 563 550 500 722 500 515 500 547]1178 1183 500 1184[778 512 509]1187 1188 550 1189[293 500 448 556]1193 1194 500 1195[927 905 972 671 461 708 751 642 593 485 527]1206 1207 308 1208[122]1209 1211 219 1212[327 510 348 191 355]1217 1219 222 1220 1221 333 1222 1223 356 1224 1227 584 1228 1234 333 1235 1236 278 1237 1244 333 1245[365 93 325 336 356]1250 1254 383 1255 1259 333 1260 1268 542 1269[383]1270 1274 542 1275[383]1276 1280 542 1281[383]1282 1286 542 1287[383]1288 1292 542 1293[383]1294 1302 542 1303[383]1304 1308 542 1309[383]1310 1314 542 1315[383]1316 1320 542 1321[383]1322 1326 542 1327[383]1328 1336 542 1337[383]1338 1342 542 1343[383]1344 1348 542 1349[383]1350 1354 542 1355[383]1356 1360 542 1361[383]1362 1370 542 1371[383]1372 1376 542 1377[383]1378 1382 542 1383[383]1384 1388 542 1389[383]1390 1394 542 1395[383]1396 1399 542 1400 1490 0 1491 1493 333 1494[505 550 716 882 716 556 779 563 778 556 722 500 611 378 625 529 756 577 846 833 673 556 673 512]1518 1519 667 1520[609 596 746 554 415 358 563 579 500 222 778]1531 1532 441 1533[667 715]1535 1536 556 1537[1302 595 760 779 903 694 668 500 878 681 829 685 1024 856 614 465 831 728 778 556 760 590 760 590 1108 918 828 600 1282 876 0 1302 595 722 500 556]1573 1578 0 1579[715 556 651 526 667 556 645 525 614 465 589 472 743 567 891 701 1087 839 722 500 722 500 611 833 897 572 673 518 850 635 850 635 278 917 688 627 520 686 564 722 550 722 550 673 518 833 686 333 667 556 667 556]1632[889 667 556 778 556 917 688 614 465 614 500 715 556 715 556 778 556 778 556 694 492 639 500 639 500 639 500 673 518 886 736 667 556 952 833 937 764 614 465 980 846 1013 831 778 550 732 1114]1679 1716 0 1717[667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 722 500 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 611 278 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 278 222]1763 1764 278 1765[667 500 667 500 667 500 556 222 556 222 556 222 556 222]1779 1784 833 1785[722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 556 667 556 722 333 722 333 722 333 722 333 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 278 611 278 611 278 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 500 667 500 944 722 944 722 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 500 611 500 611 500 556 278 722 500 556 222]1867 1874 570 1875 1876 667 1877 1882 813 1883 1888 439 1889 1890 765 1891 1894 960 1895 1902 555 1903 1904 820 1905 1910 1015 1911 1918 222 1919 1920 375 1921 1926 571 1927 1932 556 1933 1934 827 1935 1936 1022 1937 1938 973 1939 1946 550 1947[813 960 1009 960]1951 1958 779 1959 1960 810 1961 1962 1005 1963 1966 956 1967 1968 570 1969 1970 439 1971 1972 555 1973 1974 222 1975 1976 556 1977 1978 550 1979 1980 779 1981 1988 570 1989 1990 667 1991 1996 813 1997 2004 555 2005 2006 820 2007 2012 1015 2013 2020 779 2021 2022 810 2023 2024 1005 2025 2028 956 2029 2035 570 2036 2040 667 2041 2045 333 2046 2050 555 2051 2052 813 2053 2054 869 2055[722]2056 2058 333 2059 2064 222 2065 2066 278 2067 2068 424 2069 2071 333 2072 2075 550 2076 2077 573 2078 2079 550 2080 2081 667 2082[813 862 765]2085 2087 333 2088 2092 779 2093[924 827 907 810 761]2098 2099 333 2100[556]2101 2102 722 2103[833 722 1130 944 667 611]2110[500 594]2112 2115 0 2116 2117 222 2118[521 667 628 294 629 348]2124 2125 667 2126 2134 333 2135[278]2136 2139 333 2140 2141 397 2142[333]2143 2153 0 2154[667 556 500 717 889]2159 2160 500 2161 2162 555 2163[471 465 222 414 500 448 686 586 556 500 556 500 611 944 457]2178 2179 556 2180[535]2181 2182 534 2183[514 550 556 698 556 500 722 500]2191 2192 465 2193[607 378 500 550 535 728 564 491 717]2202 2203 454 2204[477]2205 2206 452 2207[490 476 161 334 450 376 554 473 474 497 382 438 457 396 444 641]2223 2224 358 2225[354 592 312 396]2229 2230 387 2231 2232 289 2233[392 125 315 500 307 395 355]2240 2241 395 2242[367 195 354 467 526 357 441 398 367 381 438 381 125 191 354 357 398 367 379 438 381 709 655 749 607 609 745 656 789 584]2272 2274 0 2275[556 333 354 500]2280[500]2282[333 250 167 556 278 200 83 0 737 722 833 686 913 883 881 667 722 500 556 611]2302 2303 500 2304[581]2305 2309 0 2310[573]2311 2313 722 2314[544 500]2316 2318 0 2319[353 0]2321 2322 556 2323[278 833]2325 2326 556 2327 2328 333 2329[500 278 500 556 380 557 762]2336 2337 222 2338[556 550 563]2341 2342 556 2343[278 688 500 222 833]2348 2349 556 2350[333 500 387]2353 2355 500 2356 2359 556 2360[439 465 635 222 500 291 556 545 379]2369 2370 356 2371[395 289]2373 2374 206 2375[392 354]2377 2380 125 2381[235]2382 2383 125 2384[303]2385 2386 500 2387 2388 307 2389[353]2390 2391 395 2392[344 191 195 307 402]2397 2398 307 2399[357]2400 2401 328 2402[367 342 395]2405 2408 0 2409[278 358 387 395 381 387 778]2416 2417 667 2418[722 333]2420 2427 570 2428 2435 222 2436 2443 550 2444 2447 222 2448 2451 550 2452[453 667 722]2455 2456 667 2457[556 500 222 755 556 722 333 667]2465 2468 500 2469[222 544 378 667 500 667 500 614 439 686 583]2480 2488 0 2489[943 490 500 556 222 556 667 722 556 278 722 556 667 500 611]2504 2505 500 2506[602 439 652]2509 2514 0 2515[222 723 722 723]2519 2529 0 2530[778 556 944 722 673 0 755 602 1037 841 278 438]2542 2543 191 2544 2545 500 2546 2548 278 2549[333 611]2551 2552 556 2553[384 539 534 556 539 556 519 556 559 556 387]2564 2567 556 2568[562 523 556 560 721 756 746 1167 746 376 657 778 556 222 496 255 556 289]2586 2588 556 2589[376 255 222 555 567 595 613 554 504 648 617 239 431 567 467 722 615 649 553 649 607 553 508 608 551 793 554 553 507 821 833 467 649 554 613 595]2625 2630 555 2631[595]2632 2635 554 2636 2639 239 2640[615]2641 2645 649 2646 2649 608 2650[553]2651 2653 555 2654 2657 595 2658 2659 613 2660 2664 554 2665 2668 648 2669[617 618]2671 2675 239 2676[658 431 567]2679 2682 467 2683 2685 615 2686[620]2687 2689 649 2690 2692 607 2693 2697 553 2698 2700 508 2701[507]2702 2707 608 2708 2711 793 2712 2714 553 2715 2717 507 2718[555 821 649 555 567 460 555 554 507 617 649 239 567 544 722 615 523 649 612 553 518 508 553 659 554 658 649 555 554 617 239 649 553 649 239 553 554 710 460 597 553]2759 2760 239 2761[431 869 839 731 511 548 612 555 565 567 460 551 554 791 515]2776 2777 612 2778[511 566 722 617 649 612 553 595 508 548 631 554 607 561 770 765 676 738 542 597 835 607 392]2801 2813 333 2814 2824 721 2825 2835 756 2836 2848 746 2849 2857 376 2858[481]2859 2861 376 2862 2863 255 2864[292 331 255]2867 2874 376 2875[657]2876 2884 556 2885[222 496]2887 2888 255 2889[301 331 255]2892 2893 289 2894[375 289]2896 2899 556 2900[578]2901 2904 333 2905[602 468 611 458 715 602 667]2912 2913 556 2914[667 966 754 829 717 951 893 667 500 1068 847 1100 831 725 550 673 556]2931 2932 278 2933[557 766 398 612 562 696 561 833 667 755 676 333 556 490 122 357 667 611 278 556 0 399 508 602 643]2958 2959 0 2960[752 722 716 705 723 726 635 722 807 716 660 528 917 758 699 598]2976 2977 706 2978[713 752 716 708 693 722 699 802 746 762 722 688 660 676 677 516 762 686 778 788 274 222 184 200 265 231 514 837 559 580 579 561 580 516 556 697 591 556 233 839 563]3019 3020 556 3021[523 557 548 556 228 555 482 551 352 837 522 575 556 555 837 556 551 391 837 572 557 744 719 278 324]3046 3047 1001 3048[727]3049 3052 1111 3053[1333 556 500 722 550 1284 1017 729 556 686 564 813 737 530 744 747 539 765 808 278 209 278 209 722 556 830 627]3080 3081 552 3082 3083 516 3084 3085 586 3086[504 553 1155 902 1167 922 1020 886 942 734 942 734 942 734 722 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 651 310 556 222 802 611 878 651 1333 952 667 556 824 698 931 805 778 556 979 748 581 410]3130 3131 582 3132[667 500 944 722 549 494 667 556 667 556 509 408]3144 3145 445 3146 3147 501 3148 3149 561 3150[327 677 345 961 680 333 750 672 476 778 556 405 333]3163 3165 590 3166[556 222 800 599 405 333 644 500 722 444 767 601 722]3179 3180 500 3181[556 789 678 611 278 669 525 714 549 669 525 778 556 667 500 722 556 722 333 667 500 787 614 755 684 667 611 524 735 667 571 1003 779 770 448 639 833 611 667 833 278 1185 570 896 478 556 667 278 556 368 347 242 851]3234 3235 556 3236 3237 548 3238[611]3239 3241 944 3242 3243 952 3244[549 607 333 503 450 627 474 700 291]3253 3254 556 3255 3256 833 3257[613 546 613 594 604 500 604]3264 3265 500 3266[333 383 273 248 415 721 764 944 921 556 649 667 611]]>>
<</Ascent 998/CIDSet 380 0 R/CapHeight 716/Descent -325/Flags 68/FontBBox[-517 -325 1359 998]/FontFamily(Arial)/FontFile2 381 0 R/FontName/UZNRGA+Arial,Italic/FontStretch/Normal/FontWeight 400/ItalicAngle -12/StemV 92/Type/FontDescriptor/XHeight 519>>
<</BaseFont/MDANCQ+Arial,Italic/CIDSystemInfo 386 0 R/CIDToGIDMap/Identity/DW 1000/FontDescriptor 387 0 R/Subtype/CIDFontType2/Type/Font/W[0[750 0]2 4 278 5[355]6 7 556 8[889 667 191]11 12 333 13[389 584 278 333]17 18 278 19 28 556 29 30 278 31 33 584 34[556 1015]36 37 667 38 39 722 40[667 611 778 722 278 500 667 556 833 722 778 667 778 722 667 611 722 667 944]59 60 667 61[611]62 64 278 65[469 556 333]68 69 556 70[500]71 72 556 73[278]74 75 556 76 77 222 78[500 222 833]81 84 556 85[333 500 278 556 500 722]91 93 500 94[334 260 334 584]98 99 667 100[722 667 722 778 722]105 110 556 111[500]112 115 556 116 119 278 120 130 556 131[400]132 134 556 135[350 537 611]138 139 737 141 142 333 143[549]145[778 713]147 149 549 150[556 576 494 713 823 549 274 370 365 768 889]161 162 611 163[333 584 549 556 549 612]169 170 556 172 173 667 174[778]176[944 556]179 180 333 181 182 222 183[549 494 500 667 167 556]189 190 333 191 192 500 193[556 278 222 333]198 202 667 203 206 278 207 209 778 210 212 722 213[278]214 223 333 224[556 222 667 500 611 500 260 722 556 667 500 667 556]237 238 584 239 241 333 242 244 834 245[556 778 556 278 667 500 722 500 722 500 556 552 333 667 556 667 556 722 625 722 667 556 667]268 269 556 270[222 556 281 556 400 722 556 722 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 667 500 611 278 611 354 722 556 722 556 611 500 611 500 570 778 837 570 556 439 603 374 652 552 500 365 1094]313[500]315[500]317 318 500 319[979 719 584 604 584]324 325 604 326[708 625]328 372 708 373[729 604]376 379 990 380 382 604 383[1021 1052 917]386 387 750 388[531 656 594 510 500 750 733 444 615 188 354 885 323 604]402 403 354 404[604 354 667 556 722 500 722 500 667 556 667 556 667 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 722 556 722 556 278 222 278 222 278 222 278 222 500 222 667]439 440 500 441[556 222 722 556 723 556 778 556 778 556 722 333 667 500 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 944 722 667 500 222 667 556]473[889 778 611 278 944 722 944 722 944 722 667 500 222 333 556 600]489 492 834 493 496 333 497[667 789 846 389 794 865 775 222]505 506 667 507[671 667 611 722 278]512 513 667 514[833 722 648 778 725 667 600 611]522 523 667 524[831 761 278 667 570 439 555 222 550 571 500 463 555 542 222 500 492 548 500 447 556 573 486 550 546 728 779 222 550 556 550 779 667 843 544 708 667]561 562 278 563[500 1066 982 844 589 639 724 667 651 667 544 704 667 917 614]578 579 715 580[589 686 833 722 778 725 667 722 611 639 795 667 727 673 920 923 805 886 651 694 1022 682 556 563 522 493 553 556 688 465]610 611 556 612[472 564 686 550 556 550 556 500 833 500 835 500 572 518 830 851 621 736 526 492 752 534]634 635 556 636[378 496 500]639 641 222 642[910 828 556 472 500 556 492 339]651[1083 670]653 665 0 666[383 0 275]669 670 0 671[278 563 542 399 508 602 247 382 599 590 247 509 461 463 599 601 247 353 574 529 566 546 461 479 550 509 694 643]699 701 493 702[236 417 815 247]706 707 509 708 709 463 710[535]711 714 694 715 717 563 718[542 399 508 602 287 411 590 287 509 461 463 601 353 574 566 546 479 550 509 694 643 247 542 461 546 576]744 763 0 764[556]766[812 604 793 634]770 785 0 786[513]787 788 834 789 822 0 823[222 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 278 222 278 222 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 812 604 812 604 812 604 812 604 812 604 722 556 722 556 793 634 793 634 793 634 793 634 793 634 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 556 278 222 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556]928 931 0 932[544 378 917 688 589 472 589 472 722 550 556 500 556 500 667 500 673 518 673 556 778 556 778 556 247 0 342 493 556 730 651 556 651 556]966 967 722 968[500 722 784 651]972 973 556 974[667 614 611 778 497 879 222 278 667 500 222 492 846 722 556 778 868 667 730 556]994 995 667 996[500 600 333 278 611 278 611 761 722 717 500 611 500]1009 1010 611 1011 1012 500 1013[556 510 438 500 556 260 413 584 278 1333 1222]1024 1025 1056 1026[778 444 1222 944 778 556 667 556 0 667 556]1038[889 778 556 778 556 667 500 778 556 778 556 611 500 222 1333 1222 1056 778 556 1034 618 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556]1069 1072 278 1073[778 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 722 556 722 556 667 500 611 278 545 437 722 556 669]1094 1095 604 1096[611 500 667 556 667 556 778 556 0 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 500]1113 1116 556 1117 1118 500 1119 1121 556 1122[704 439 465 616 509 278]1128 1129 556 1130[550 501 617]1133 1135 556 1136 1137 222 1138[356]1139 1141 222 1142[563]1143 1145 833 1146 1147 556 1148[583 556 766 779 556]1153 1159 333 1160 1161 534 1162[500 291 305 290 348]1167 1168 278 1169[556 563 550 500 722 500 515 500 547]1178 1183 500 1184[778 512 509]1187 1188 550 1189[293 500 448 556]1193 1194 500 1195[927 905 972 671 461 708 751 642 593 485 527]1206 1207 308 1208[122]1209 1211 219 1212[327 510 348 191 355]1217 1219 222 1220 1221 333 1222 1223 356 1224 1227 584 1228 1234 333 1235 1236 278 1237 1244 333 1245[365 93 325 336 356]1250 1254 383 1255 1259 333 1260 1268 542 1269[383]1270 1274 542 1275[383]1276 1280 542 1281[383]1282 1286 542 1287[383]1288 1292 542 1293[383]1294 1302 542 1303[383]1304 1308 542 1309[383]1310 1314 542 1315[383]1316 1320 542 1321[383]1322 1326 542 1327[383]1328 1336 542 1337[383]1338 1342 542 1343[383]1344 1348 542 1349[383]1350 1354 542 1355[383]1356 1360 542 1361[383]1362 1370 542 1371[383]1372 1376 542 1377[383]1378 1382 542 1383[383]1384 1388 542 1389[383]1390 1394 542 1395[383]1396 1399 542 1400 1490 0 1491 1493 333 1494[505 550 716 882 716 556 779 563 778 556 722 500 611 378 625 529 756 577 846 833 673 556 673 512]1518 1519 667 1520[609 596 746 554 415 358 563 579 500 222 778]1531 1532 441 1533[667 715]1535 1536 556 1537[1302 595 760 779 903 694 668 500 878 681 829 685 1024 856 614 465 831 728 778 556 760 590 760 590 1108 918 828 600 1282 876 0 1302 595 722 500 556]1573 1578 0 1579[715 556 651 526 667 556 645 525 614 465 589 472 743 567 891 701 1087 839 722 500 722 500 611 833 897 572 673 518 850 635 850 635 278 917 688 627 520 686 564 722 550 722 550 673 518 833 686 333 667 556 667 556]1632[889 667 556 778 556 917 688 614 465 614 500 715 556 715 556 778 556 778 556 694 492 639 500 639 500 639 500 673 518 886 736 667 556 952 833 937 764 614 465 980 846 1013 831 778 550 732 1114]1679 1716 0 1717[667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 722 500 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 611 278 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 278 222]1763 1764 278 1765[667 500 667 500 667 500 556 222 556 222 556 222 556 222]1779 1784 833 1785[722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 556 667 556 722 333 722 333 722 333 722 333 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 278 611 278 611 278 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 500 667 500 944 722 944 722 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 500 611 500 611 500 556 278 722 500 556 222]1867 1874 570 1875 1876 667 1877 1882 813 1883 1888 439 1889 1890 765 1891 1894 960 1895 1902 555 1903 1904 820 1905 1910 1015 1911 1918 222 1919 1920 375 1921 1926 571 1927 1932 556 1933 1934 827 1935 1936 1022 1937 1938 973 1939 1946 550 1947[813 960 1009 960]1951 1958 779 1959 1960 810 1961 1962 1005 1963 1966 956 1967 1968 570 1969 1970 439 1971 1972 555 1973 1974 222 1975 1976 556 1977 1978 550 1979 1980 779 1981 1988 570 1989 1990 667 1991 1996 813 1997 2004 555 2005 2006 820 2007 2012 1015 2013 2020 779 2021 2022 810 2023 2024 1005 2025 2028 956 2029 2035 570 2036 2040 667 2041 2045 333 2046 2050 555 2051 2052 813 2053 2054 869 2055[722]2056 2058 333 2059 2064 222 2065 2066 278 2067 2068 424 2069 2071 333 2072 2075 550 2076 2077 573 2078 2079 550 2080 2081 667 2082[813 862 765]2085 2087 333 2088 2092 779 2093[924 827 907 810 761]2098 2099 333 2100[556]2101 2102 722 2103[833 722 1130 944 667 611]2110[500 594]2112 2115 0 2116 2117 222 2118[521 667 628 294 629 348]2124 2125 667 2126 2134 333 2135[278]2136 2139 333 2140 2141 397 2142[333]2143 2153 0 2154[667 556 500 717 889]2159 2160 500 2161 2162 555 2163[471 465 222 414 500 448 686 586 556 500 556 500 611 944 457]2178 2179 556 2180[535]2181 2182 534 2183[514 550 556 698 556 500 722 500]2191 2192 465 2193[607 378 500 550 535 728 564 491 717]2202 2203 454 2204[477]2205 2206 452 2207[490 476 161 334 450 376 554 473 474 497 382 438 457 396 444 641]2223 2224 358 2225[354 592 312 396]2229 2230 387 2231 2232 289 2233[392 125 315 500 307 395 355]2240 2241 395 2242[367 195 354 467 526 357 441 398 367 381 438 381 125 191 354 357 398 367 379 438 381 709 655 749 607 609 745 656 789 584]2272 2274 0 2275[556 333 354 500]2280[500]2282[333 250 167 556 278 200 83 0 737 722 833 686 913 883 881 667 722 500 556 611]2302 2303 500 2304[581]2305 2309 0 2310[573]2311 2313 722 2314[544 500]2316 2318 0 2319[353 0]2321 2322 556 2323[278 833]2325 2326 556 2327 2328 333 2329[500 278 500 556 380 557 762]2336 2337 222 2338[556 550 563]2341 2342 556 2343[278 688 500 222 833]2348 2349 556 2350[333 500 387]2353 2355 500 2356 2359 556 2360[439 465 635 222 500 291 556 545 379]2369 2370 356 2371[395 289]2373 2374 206 2375[392 354]2377 2380 125 2381[235]2382 2383 125 2384[303]2385 2386 500 2387 2388 307 2389[353]2390 2391 395 2392[344 191 195 307 402]2397 2398 307 2399[357]2400 2401 328 2402[367 342 395]2405 2408 0 2409[278 358 387 395 381 387 778]2416 2417 667 2418[722 333]2420 2427 570 2428 2435 222 2436 2443 550 2444 2447 222 2448 2451 550 2452[453 667 722]2455 2456 667 2457[556 500 222 755 556 722 333 667]2465 2468 500 2469[222 544 378 667 500 667 500 614 439 686 583]2480 2488 0 2489[943 490 500 556 222 556 667 722 556 278 722 556 667 500 611]2504 2505 500 2506[602 439 652]2509 2514 0 2515[222 723 722 723]2519 2529 0 2530[778 556 944 722 673 0 755 602 1037 841 278 438]2542 2543 191 2544 2545 500 2546 2548 278 2549[333 611]2551 2552 556 2553[384 539 534 556 539 556 519 556 559 556 387]2564 2567 556 2568[562 523 556 560 721 756 746 1167 746 376 657 778 556 222 496 255 556 289]2586 2588 556 2589[376 255 222 555 567 595 613 554 504 648 617 239 431 567 467 722 615 649 553 649 607 553 508 608 551 793 554 553 507 821 833 467 649 554 613 595]2625 2630 555 2631[595]2632 2635 554 2636 2639 239 2640[615]2641 2645 649 2646 2649 608 2650[553]2651 2653 555 2654 2657 595 2658 2659 613 2660 2664 554 2665 2668 648 2669[617 618]2671 2675 239 2676[658 431 567]2679 2682 467 2683 2685 615 2686[620]2687 2689 649 2690 2692 607 2693 2697 553 2698 2700 508 2701[507]2702 2707 608 2708 2711 793 2712 2714 553 2715 2717 507 2718[555 821 649 555 567 460 555 554 507 617 649 239 567 544 722 615 523 649 612 553 518 508 553 659 554 658 649 555 554 617 239 649 553 649 239 553 554 710 460 597 553]2759 2760 239 2761[431 869 839 731 511 548 612 555 565 567 460 551 554 791 515]2776 2777 612 2778[511 566 722 617 649 612 553 595 508 548 631 554 607 561 770 765 676 738 542 597 835 607 392]2801 2813 333 2814 2824 721 2825 2835 756 2836 2848 746 2849 2857 376 2858[481]2859 2861 376 2862 2863 255 2864[292 331 255]2867 2874 376 2875[657]2876 2884 556 2885[222 496]2887 2888 255 2889[301 331 255]2892 2893 289 2894[375 289]2896 2899 556 2900[578]2901 2904 333 2905[602 468 611 458 715 602 667]2912 2913 556 2914[667 966 754 829 717 951 893 667 500 1068 847 1100 831 725 550 673 556]2931 2932 278 2933[557 766 398 612 562 696 561 833 667 755 676 333 556 490 122 357 667 611 278 556 0 399 508 602 643]2958 2959 0 2960[752 722 716 705 723 726 635 722 807 716 660 528 917 758 699 598]2976 2977 706 2978[713 752 716 708 693 722 699 802 746 762 722 688 660 676 677 516 762 686 778 788 274 222 184 200 265 231 514 837 559 580 579 561 580 516 556 697 591 556 233 839 563]3019 3020 556 3021[523 557 548 556 228 555 482 551 352 837 522 575 556 555 837 556 551 391 837 572 557 744 719 278 324]3046 3047 1001 3048[727]3049 3052 1111 3053[1333 556 500 722 550 1284 1017 729 556 686 564 813 737 530 744 747 539 765 808 278 209 278 209 722 556 830 627]3080 3081 552 3082 3083 516 3084 3085 586 3086[504 553 1155 902 1167 922 1020 886 942 734 942 734 942 734 722 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 651 310 556 222 802 611 878 651 1333 952 667 556 824 698 931 805 778 556 979 748 581 410]3130 3131 582 3132[667 500 944 722 549 494 667 556 667 556 509 408]3144 3145 445 3146 3147 501 3148 3149 561 3150[327 677 345 961 680 333 750 672 476 778 556 405 333]3163 3165 590 3166[556 222 800 599 405 333 644 500 722 444 767 601 722]3179 3180 500 3181[556 789 678 611 278 669 525 714 549 669 525 778 556 667 500 722 556 722 333 667 500 787 614 755 684 667 611 524 735 667 571 1003 779 770 448 639 833 611 667 833 278 1185 570 896 478 556 667 278 556 368 347 242 851]3234 3235 556 3236 3237 548 3238[611]3239 3241 944 3242 3243 952 3244[549 607 333 503 450 627 474 700 291]3253 3254 556 3255 3256 833 3257[613 546 613 594 604 500 604]3264 3265 500 3266[333 383 273 248 415 721 764 944 921 556 649 667 611]]>>
<</Ascent 998/CIDSet 388 0 R/CapHeight 716/Descent -325/Flags 68/FontBBox[-517 -325 1359 998]/FontFamily(Arial)/FontFile2 389 0 R/FontName/MDANCQ+Arial,Italic/FontStretch/Normal/FontWeight 400/ItalicAngle -12/StemV 92/Type/FontDescriptor/XHeight 519>>
<</BaseFont/XMIWTU+Arial,Italic/CIDSystemInfo 394 0 R/CIDToGIDMap/Identity/DW 1000/FontDescriptor 395 0 R/Subtype/CIDFontType2/Type/Font/W[0[750 0]2 4 278 5[355]6 7 556 8[889 667 191]11 12 333 13[389 584 278 333]17 18 278 19 28 556 29 30 278 31 33 584 34[556 1015]36 37 667 38 39 722 40[667 611 778 722 278 500 667 556 833 722 778 667 778 722 667 611 722 667 944]59 60 667 61[611]62 64 278 65[469 556 333]68 69 556 70[500]71 72 556 73[278]74 75 556 76 77 222 78[500 222 833]81 84 556 85[333 500 278 556 500 722]91 93 500 94[334 260 334 584]98 99 667 100[722 667 722 778 722]105 110 556 111[500]112 115 556 116 119 278 120 130 556 131[400]132 134 556 135[350 537 611]138 139 737 141 142 333 143[549]145[778 713]147 149 549 150[556 576 494 713 823 549 274 370 365 768 889]161 162 611 163[333 584 549 556 549 612]169 170 556 172 173 667 174[778]176[944 556]179 180 333 181 182 222 183[549 494 500 667 167 556]189 190 333 191 192 500 193[556 278 222 333]198 202 667 203 206 278 207 209 778 210 212 722 213[278]214 223 333 224[556 222 667 500 611 500 260 722 556 667 500 667 556]237 238 584 239 241 333 242 244 834 245[556 778 556 278 667 500 722 500 722 500 556 552 333 667 556 667 556 722 625 722 667 556 667]268 269 556 270[222 556 281 556 400 722 556 722 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 667 500 611 278 611 354 722 556 722 556 611 500 611 500 570 778 837 570 556 439 603 374 652 552 500 365 1094]313[500]315[500]317 318 500 319[979 719 584 604 584]324 325 604 326[708 625]328 372 708 373[729 604]376 379 990 380 382 604 383[1021 1052 917]386 387 750 388[531 656 594 510 500 750 733 444 615 188 354 885 323 604]402 403 354 404[604 354 667 556 722 500 722 500 667 556 667 556 667 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 722 556 722 556 278 222 278 222 278 222 278 222 500 222 667]439 440 500 441[556 222 722 556 723 556 778 556 778 556 722 333 667 500 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 944 722 667 500 222 667 556]473[889 778 611 278 944 722 944 722 944 722 667 500 222 333 556 600]489 492 834 493 496 333 497[667 789 846 389 794 865 775 222]505 506 667 507[671 667 611 722 278]512 513 667 514[833 722 648 778 725 667 600 611]522 523 667 524[831 761 278 667 570 439 555 222 550 571 500 463 555 542 222 500 492 548 500 447 556 573 486 550 546 728 779 222 550 556 550 779 667 843 544 708 667]561 562 278 563[500 1066 982 844 589 639 724 667 651 667 544 704 667 917 614]578 579 715 580[589 686 833 722 778 725 667 722 611 639 795 667 727 673 920 923 805 886 651 694 1022 682 556 563 522 493 553 556 688 465]610 611 556 612[472 564 686 550 556 550 556 500 833 500 835 500 572 518 830 851 621 736 526 492 752 534]634 635 556 636[378 496 500]639 641 222 642[910 828 556 472 500 556 492 339]651[1083 670]653 665 0 666[383 0 275]669 670 0 671[278 563 542 399 508 602 247 382 599 590 247 509 461 463 599 601 247 353 574 529 566 546 461 479 550 509 694 643]699 701 493 702[236 417 815 247]706 707 509 708 709 463 710[535]711 714 694 715 717 563 718[542 399 508 602 287 411 590 287 509 461 463 601 353 574 566 546 479 550 509 694 643 247 542 461 546 576]744 763 0 764[556]766[812 604 793 634]770 785 0 786[513]787 788 834 789 822 0 823[222 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 278 222 278 222 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 812 604 812 604 812 604 812 604 812 604 722 556 722 556 793 634 793 634 793 634 793 634 793 634 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 556 278 222 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556]928 931 0 932[544 378 917 688 589 472 589 472 722 550 556 500 556 500 667 500 673 518 673 556 778 556 778 556 247 0 342 493 556 730 651 556 651 556]966 967 722 968[500 722 784 651]972 973 556 974[667 614 611 778 497 879 222 278 667 500 222 492 846 722 556 778 868 667 730 556]994 995 667 996[500 600 333 278 611 278 611 761 722 717 500 611 500]1009 1010 611 1011 1012 500 1013[556 510 438 500 556 260 413 584 278 1333 1222]1024 1025 1056 1026[778 444 1222 944 778 556 667 556 0 667 556]1038[889 778 556 778 556 667 500 778 556 778 556 611 500 222 1333 1222 1056 778 556 1034 618 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556]1069 1072 278 1073[778 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 722 556 722 556 667 500 611 278 545 437 722 556 669]1094 1095 604 1096[611 500 667 556 667 556 778 556 0 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 500]1113 1116 556 1117 1118 500 1119 1121 556 1122[704 439 465 616 509 278]1128 1129 556 1130[550 501 617]1133 1135 556 1136 1137 222 1138[356]1139 1141 222 1142[563]1143 1145 833 1146 1147 556 1148[583 556 766 779 556]1153 1159 333 1160 1161 534 1162[500 291 305 290 348]1167 1168 278 1169[556 563 550 500 722 500 515 500 547]1178 1183 500 1184[778 512 509]1187 1188 550 1189[293 500 448 556]1193 1194 500 1195[927 905 972 671 461 708 751 642 593 485 527]1206 1207 308 1208[122]1209 1211 219 1212[327 510 348 191 355]1217 1219 222 1220 1221 333 1222 1223 356 1224 1227 584 1228 1234 333 1235 1236 278 1237 1244 333 1245[365 93 325 336 356]1250 1254 383 1255 1259 333 1260 1268 542 1269[383]1270 1274 542 1275[383]1276 1280 542 1281[383]1282 1286 542 1287[383]1288 1292 542 1293[383]1294 1302 542 1303[383]1304 1308 542 1309[383]1310 1314 542 1315[383]1316 1320 542 1321[383]1322 1326 542 1327[383]1328 1336 542 1337[383]1338 1342 542 1343[383]1344 1348 542 1349[383]1350 1354 542 1355[383]1356 1360 542 1361[383]1362 1370 542 1371[383]1372 1376 542 1377[383]1378 1382 542 1383[383]1384 1388 542 1389[383]1390 1394 542 1395[383]1396 1399 542 1400 1490 0 1491 1493 333 1494[505 550 716 882 716 556 779 563 778 556 722 500 611 378 625 529 756 577 846 833 673 556 673 512]1518 1519 667 1520[609 596 746 554 415 358 563 579 500 222 778]1531 1532 441 1533[667 715]1535 1536 556 1537[1302 595 760 779 903 694 668 500 878 681 829 685 1024 856 614 465 831 728 778 556 760 590 760 590 1108 918 828 600 1282 876 0 1302 595 722 500 556]1573 1578 0 1579[715 556 651 526 667 556 645 525 614 465 589 472 743 567 891 701 1087 839 722 500 722 500 611 833 897 572 673 518 850 635 850 635 278 917 688 627 520 686 564 722 550 722 550 673 518 833 686 333 667 556 667 556]1632[889 667 556 778 556 917 688 614 465 614 500 715 556 715 556 778 556 778 556 694 492 639 500 639 500 639 500 673 518 886 736 667 556 952 833 937 764 614 465 980 846 1013 831 778 550 732 1114]1679 1716 0 1717[667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 722 500 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 611 278 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 278 222]1763 1764 278 1765[667 500 667 500 667 500 556 222 556 222 556 222 556 222]1779 1784 833 1785[722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 556 667 556 722 333 722 333 722 333 722 333 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 278 611 278 611 278 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 500 667 500 944 722 944 722 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 500 611 500 611 500 556 278 722 500 556 222]1867 1874 570 1875 1876 667 1877 1882 813 1883 1888 439 1889 1890 765 1891 1894 960 1895 1902 555 1903 1904 820 1905 1910 1015 1911 1918 222 1919 1920 375 1921 1926 571 1927 1932 556 1933 1934 827 1935 1936 1022 1937 1938 973 1939 1946 550 1947[813 960 1009 960]1951 1958 779 1959 1960 810 1961 1962 1005 1963 1966 956 1967 1968 570 1969 1970 439 1971 1972 555 1973 1974 222 1975 1976 556 1977 1978 550 1979 1980 779 1981 1988 570 1989 1990 667 1991 1996 813 1997 2004 555 2005 2006 820 2007 2012 1015 2013 2020 779 2021 2022 810 2023 2024 1005 2025 2028 956 2029 2035 570 2036 2040 667 2041 2045 333 2046 2050 555 2051 2052 813 2053 2054 869 2055[722]2056 2058 333 2059 2064 222 2065 2066 278 2067 2068 424 2069 2071 333 2072 2075 550 2076 2077 573 2078 2079 550 2080 2081 667 2082[813 862 765]2085 2087 333 2088 2092 779 2093[924 827 907 810 761]2098 2099 333 2100[556]2101 2102 722 2103[833 722 1130 944 667 611]2110[500 594]2112 2115 0 2116 2117 222 2118[521 667 628 294 629 348]2124 2125 667 2126 2134 333 2135[278]2136 2139 333 2140 2141 397 2142[333]2143 2153 0 2154[667 556 500 717 889]2159 2160 500 2161 2162 555 2163[471 465 222 414 500 448 686 586 556 500 556 500 611 944 457]2178 2179 556 2180[535]2181 2182 534 2183[514 550 556 698 556 500 722 500]2191 2192 465 2193[607 378 500 550 535 728 564 491 717]2202 2203 454 2204[477]2205 2206 452 2207[490 476 161 334 450 376 554 473 474 497 382 438 457 396 444 641]2223 2224 358 2225[354 592 312 396]2229 2230 387 2231 2232 289 2233[392 125 315 500 307 395 355]2240 2241 395 2242[367 195 354 467 526 357 441 398 367 381 438 381 125 191 354 357 398 367 379 438 381 709 655 749 607 609 745 656 789 584]2272 2274 0 2275[556 333 354 500]2280[500]2282[333 250 167 556 278 200 83 0 737 722 833 686 913 883 881 667 722 500 556 611]2302 2303 500 2304[581]2305 2309 0 2310[573]2311 2313 722 2314[544 500]2316 2318 0 2319[353 0]2321 2322 556 2323[278 833]2325 2326 556 2327 2328 333 2329[500 278 500 556 380 557 762]2336 2337 222 2338[556 550 563]2341 2342 556 2343[278 688 500 222 833]2348 2349 556 2350[333 500 387]2353 2355 500 2356 2359 556 2360[439 465 635 222 500 291 556 545 379]2369 2370 356 2371[395 289]2373 2374 206 2375[392 354]2377 2380 125 2381[235]2382 2383 125 2384[303]2385 2386 500 2387 2388 307 2389[353]2390 2391 395 2392[344 191 195 307 402]2397 2398 307 2399[357]2400 2401 328 2402[367 342 395]2405 2408 0 2409[278 358 387 395 381 387 778]2416 2417 667 2418[722 333]2420 2427 570 2428 2435 222 2436 2443 550 2444 2447 222 2448 2451 550 2452[453 667 722]2455 2456 667 2457[556 500 222 755 556 722 333 667]2465 2468 500 2469[222 544 378 667 500 667 500 614 439 686 583]2480 2488 0 2489[943 490 500 556 222 556 667 722 556 278 722 556 667 500 611]2504 2505 500 2506[602 439 652]2509 2514 0 2515[222 723 722 723]2519 2529 0 2530[778 556 944 722 673 0 755 602 1037 841 278 438]2542 2543 191 2544 2545 500 2546 2548 278 2549[333 611]2551 2552 556 2553[384 539 534 556 539 556 519 556 559 556 387]2564 2567 556 2568[562 523 556 560 721 756 746 1167 746 376 657 778 556 222 496 255 556 289]2586 2588 556 2589[376 255 222 555 567 595 613 554 504 648 617 239 431 567 467 722 615 649 553 649 607 553 508 608 551 793 554 553 507 821 833 467 649 554 613 595]2625 2630 555 2631[595]2632 2635 554 2636 2639 239 2640[615]2641 2645 649 2646 2649 608 2650[553]2651 2653 555 2654 2657 595 2658 2659 613 2660 2664 554 2665 2668 648 2669[617 618]2671 2675 239 2676[658 431 567]2679 2682 467 2683 2685 615 2686[620]2687 2689 649 2690 2692 607 2693 2697 553 2698 2700 508 2701[507]2702 2707 608 2708 2711 793 2712 2714 553 2715 2717 507 2718[555 821 649 555 567 460 555 554 507 617 649 239 567 544 722 615 523 649 612 553 518 508 553 659 554 658 649 555 554 617 239 649 553 649 239 553 554 710 460 597 553]2759 2760 239 2761[431 869 839 731 511 548 612 555 565 567 460 551 554 791 515]2776 2777 612 2778[511 566 722 617 649 612 553 595 508 548 631 554 607 561 770 765 676 738 542 597 835 607 392]2801 2813 333 2814 2824 721 2825 2835 756 2836 2848 746 2849 2857 376 2858[481]2859 2861 376 2862 2863 255 2864[292 331 255]2867 2874 376 2875[657]2876 2884 556 2885[222 496]2887 2888 255 2889[301 331 255]2892 2893 289 2894[375 289]2896 2899 556 2900[578]2901 2904 333 2905[602 468 611 458 715 602 667]2912 2913 556 2914[667 966 754 829 717 951 893 667 500 1068 847 1100 831 725 550 673 556]2931 2932 278 2933[557 766 398 612 562 696 561 833 667 755 676 333 556 490 122 357 667 611 278 556 0 399 508 602 643]2958 2959 0 2960[752 722 716 705 723 726 635 722 807 716 660 528 917 758 699 598]2976 2977 706 2978[713 752 716 708 693 722 699 802 746 762 722 688 660 676 677 516 762 686 778 788 274 222 184 200 265 231 514 837 559 580 579 561 580 516 556 697 591 556 233 839 563]3019 3020 556 3021[523 557 548 556 228 555 482 551 352 837 522 575 556 555 837 556 551 391 837 572 557 744 719 278 324]3046 3047 1001 3048[727]3049 3052 1111 3053[1333 556 500 722 550 1284 1017 729 556 686 564 813 737 530 744 747 539 765 808 278 209 278 209 722 556 830 627]3080 3081 552 3082 3083 516 3084 3085 586 3086[504 553 1155 902 1167 922 1020 886 942 734 942 734 942 734 722 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 651 310 556 222 802 611 878 651 1333 952 667 556 824 698 931 805 778 556 979 748 581 410]3130 3131 582 3132[667 500 944 722 549 494 667 556 667 556 509 408]3144 3145 445 3146 3147 501 3148 3149 561 3150[327 677 345 961 680 333 750 672 476 778 556 405 333]3163 3165 590 3166[556 222 800 599 405 333 644 500 722 444 767 601 722]3179 3180 500 3181[556 789 678 611 278 669 525 714 549 669 525 778 556 667 500 722 556 722 333 667 500 787 614 755 684 667 611 524 735 667 571 1003 779 770 448 639 833 611 667 833 278 1185 570 896 478 556 667 278 556 368 347 242 851]3234 3235 556 3236 3237 548 3238[611]3239 3241 944 3242 3243 952 3244[549 607 333 503 450 627 474 700 291]3253 3254 556 3255 3256 833 3257[613 546 613 594 604 500 604]3264 3265 500 3266[333 383 273 248 415 721 764 944 921 556 649 667 611]]>>
<</Ascent 998/CIDSet 396 0 R/CapHeight 716/Descent -325/Flags 68/FontBBox[-517 -325 1359 998]/FontFamily(Arial)/FontFile2 397 0 R/FontName/XMIWTU+Arial,Italic/FontStretch/Normal/FontWeight 400/ItalicAngle -12/StemV 92/Type/FontDescriptor/XHeight 519>>
<</BaseFont/KNDESU+Arial,Italic/CIDSystemInfo 402 0 R/CIDToGIDMap/Identity/DW 1000/FontDescriptor 403 0 R/Subtype/CIDFontType2/Type/Font/W[0[750 0]2 4 278 5[355]6 7 556 8[889 667 191]11 12 333 13[389 584 278 333]17 18 278 19 28 556 29 30 278 31 33 584 34[556 1015]36 37 667 38 39 722 40[667 611 778 722 278 500 667 556 833 722 778 667 778 722 667 611 722 667 944]59 60 667 61[611]62 64 278 65[469 556 333]68 69 556 70[500]71 72 556 73[278]74 75 556 76 77 222 78[500 222 833]81 84 556 85[333 500 278 556 500 722]91 93 500 94[334 260 334 584]98 99 667 100[722 667 722 778 722]105 110 556 111[500]112 115 556 116 119 278 120 130 556 131[400]132 134 556 135[350 537 611]138 139 737 141 142 333 143[549]145[778 713]147 149 549 150[556 576 494 713 823 549 274 370 365 768 889]161 162 611 163[333 584 549 556 549 612]169 170 556 172 173 667 174[778]176[944 556]179 180 333 181 182 222 183[549 494 500 667 167 556]189 190 333 191 192 500 193[556 278 222 333]198 202 667 203 206 278 207 209 778 210 212 722 213[278]214 223 333 224[556 222 667 500 611 500 260 722 556 667 500 667 556]237 238 584 239 241 333 242 244 834 245[556 778 556 278 667 500 722 500 722 500 556 552 333 667 556 667 556 722 625 722 667 556 667]268 269 556 270[222 556 281 556 400 722 556 722 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 667 500 611 278 611 354 722 556 722 556 611 500 611 500 570 778 837 570 556 439 603 374 652 552 500 365 1094]313[500]315[500]317 318 500 319[979 719 584 604 584]324 325 604 326[708 625]328 372 708 373[729 604]376 379 990 380 382 604 383[1021 1052 917]386 387 750 388[531 656 594 510 500 750 733 444 615 188 354 885 323 604]402 403 354 404[604 354 667 556 722 500 722 500 667 556 667 556 667 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 722 556 722 556 278 222 278 222 278 222 278 222 500 222 667]439 440 500 441[556 222 722 556 723 556 778 556 778 556 722 333 667 500 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 944 722 667 500 222 667 556]473[889 778 611 278 944 722 944 722 944 722 667 500 222 333 556 600]489 492 834 493 496 333 497[667 789 846 389 794 865 775 222]505 506 667 507[671 667 611 722 278]512 513 667 514[833 722 648 778 725 667 600 611]522 523 667 524[831 761 278 667 570 439 555 222 550 571 500 463 555 542 222 500 492 548 500 447 556 573 486 550 546 728 779 222 550 556 550 779 667 843 544 708 667]561 562 278 563[500 1066 982 844 589 639 724 667 651 667 544 704 667 917 614]578 579 715 580[589 686 833 722 778 725 667 722 611 639 795 667 727 673 920 923 805 886 651 694 1022 682 556 563 522 493 553 556 688 465]610 611 556 612[472 564 686 550 556 550 556 500 833 500 835 500 572 518 830 851 621 736 526 492 752 534]634 635 556 636[378 496 500]639 641 222 642[910 828 556 472 500 556 492 339]651[1083 670]653 665 0 666[383 0 275]669 670 0 671[278 563 542 399 508 602 247 382 599 590 247 509 461 463 599 601 247 353 574 529 566 546 461 479 550 509 694 643]699 701 493 702[236 417 815 247]706 707 509 708 709 463 710[535]711 714 694 715 717 563 718[542 399 508 602 287 411 590 287 509 461 463 601 353 574 566 546 479 550 509 694 643 247 542 461 546 576]744 763 0 764[556]766[812 604 793 634]770 785 0 786[513]787 788 834 789 822 0 823[222 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 278 222 278 222 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 812 604 812 604 812 604 812 604 812 604 722 556 722 556 793 634 793 634 793 634 793 634 793 634 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 556 278 222 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556]928 931 0 932[544 378 917 688 589 472 589 472 722 550 556 500 556 500 667 500 673 518 673 556 778 556 778 556 247 0 342 493 556 730 651 556 651 556]966 967 722 968[500 722 784 651]972 973 556 974[667 614 611 778 497 879 222 278 667 500 222 492 846 722 556 778 868 667 730 556]994 995 667 996[500 600 333 278 611 278 611 761 722 717 500 611 500]1009 1010 611 1011 1012 500 1013[556 510 438 500 556 260 413 584 278 1333 1222]1024 1025 1056 1026[778 444 1222 944 778 556 667 556 0 667 556]1038[889 778 556 778 556 667 500 778 556 778 556 611 500 222 1333 1222 1056 778 556 1034 618 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556]1069 1072 278 1073[778 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 722 556 722 556 667 500 611 278 545 437 722 556 669]1094 1095 604 1096[611 500 667 556 667 556 778 556 0 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 500]1113 1116 556 1117 1118 500 1119 1121 556 1122[704 439 465 616 509 278]1128 1129 556 1130[550 501 617]1133 1135 556 1136 1137 222 1138[356]1139 1141 222 1142[563]1143 1145 833 1146 1147 556 1148[583 556 766 779 556]1153 1159 333 1160 1161 534 1162[500 291 305 290 348]1167 1168 278 1169[556 563 550 500 722 500 515 500 547]1178 1183 500 1184[778 512 509]1187 1188 550 1189[293 500 448 556]1193 1194 500 1195[927 905 972 671 461 708 751 642 593 485 527]1206 1207 308 1208[122]1209 1211 219 1212[327 510 348 191 355]1217 1219 222 1220 1221 333 1222 1223 356 1224 1227 584 1228 1234 333 1235 1236 278 1237 1244 333 1245[365 93 325 336 356]1250 1254 383 1255 1259 333 1260 1268 542 1269[383]1270 1274 542 1275[383]1276 1280 542 1281[383]1282 1286 542 1287[383]1288 1292 542 1293[383]1294 1302 542 1303[383]1304 1308 542 1309[383]1310 1314 542 1315[383]1316 1320 542 1321[383]1322 1326 542 1327[383]1328 1336 542 1337[383]1338 1342 542 1343[383]1344 1348 542 1349[383]1350 1354 542 1355[383]1356 1360 542 1361[383]1362 1370 542 1371[383]1372 1376 542 1377[383]1378 1382 542 1383[383]1384 1388 542 1389[383]1390 1394 542 1395[383]1396 1399 542 1400 1490 0 1491 1493 333 1494[505 550 716 882 716 556 779 563 778 556 722 500 611 378 625 529 756 577 846 833 673 556 673 512]1518 1519 667 1520[609 596 746 554 415 358 563 579 500 222 778]1531 1532 441 1533[667 715]1535 1536 556 1537[1302 595 760 779 903 694 668 500 878 681 829 685 1024 856 614 465 831 728 778 556 760 590 760 590 1108 918 828 600 1282 876 0 1302 595 722 500 556]1573 1578 0 1579[715 556 651 526 667 556 645 525 614 465 589 472 743 567 891 701 1087 839 722 500 722 500 611 833 897 572 673 518 850 635 850 635 278 917 688 627 520 686 564 722 550 722 550 673 518 833 686 333 667 556 667 556]1632[889 667 556 778 556 917 688 614 465 614 500 715 556 715 556 778 556 778 556 694 492 639 500 639 500 639 500 673 518 886 736 667 556 952 833 937 764 614 465 980 846 1013 831 778 550 732 1114]1679 1716 0 1717[667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 722 500 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 611 278 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 278 222]1763 1764 278 1765[667 500 667 500 667 500 556 222 556 222 556 222 556 222]1779 1784 833 1785[722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 556 667 556 722 333 722 333 722 333 722 333 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 278 611 278 611 278 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 500 667 500 944 722 944 722 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 500 611 500 611 500 556 278 722 500 556 222]1867 1874 570 1875 1876 667 1877 1882 813 1883 1888 439 1889 1890 765 1891 1894 960 1895 1902 555 1903 1904 820 1905 1910 1015 1911 1918 222 1919 1920 375 1921 1926 571 1927 1932 556 1933 1934 827 1935 1936 1022 1937 1938 973 1939 1946 550 1947[813 960 1009 960]1951 1958 779 1959 1960 810 1961 1962 1005 1963 1966 956 1967 1968 570 1969 1970 439 1971 1972 555 1973 1974 222 1975 1976 556 1977 1978 550 1979 1980 779 1981 1988 570 1989 1990 667 1991 1996 813 1997 2004 555 2005 2006 820 2007 2012 1015 2013 2020 779 2021 2022 810 2023 2024 1005 2025 2028 956 2029 2035 570 2036 2040 667 2041 2045 333 2046 2050 555 2051 2052 813 2053 2054 869 2055[722]2056 2058 333 2059 2064 222 2065 2066 278 2067 2068 424 2069 2071 333 2072 2075 550 2076 2077 573 2078 2079 550 2080 2081 667 2082[813 862 765]2085 2087 333 2088 2092 779 2093[924 827 907 810 761]2098 2099 333 2100[556]2101 2102 722 2103[833 722 1130 944 667 611]2110[500 594]2112 2115 0 2116 2117 222 2118[521 667 628 294 629 348]2124 2125 667 2126 2134 333 2135[278]2136 2139 333 2140 2141 397 2142[333]2143 2153 0 2154[667 556 500 717 889]2159 2160 500 2161 2162 555 2163[471 465 222 414 500 448 686 586 556 500 556 500 611 944 457]2178 2179 556 2180[535]2181 2182 534 2183[514 550 556 698 556 500 722 500]2191 2192 465 2193[607 378 500 550 535 728 564 491 717]2202 2203 454 2204[477]2205 2206 452 2207[490 476 161 334 450 376 554 473 474 497 382 438 457 396 444 641]2223 2224 358 2225[354 592 312 396]2229 2230 387 2231 2232 289 2233[392 125 315 500 307 395 355]2240 2241 395 2242[367 195 354 467 526 357 441 398 367 381 438 381 125 191 354 357 398 367 379 438 381 709 655 749 607 609 745 656 789 584]2272 2274 0 2275[556 333 354 500]2280[500]2282[333 250 167 556 278 200 83 0 737 722 833 686 913 883 881 667 722 500 556 611]2302 2303 500 2304[581]2305 2309 0 2310[573]2311 2313 722 2314[544 500]2316 2318 0 2319[353 0]2321 2322 556 2323[278 833]2325 2326 556 2327 2328 333 2329[500 278 500 556 380 557 762]2336 2337 222 2338[556 550 563]2341 2342 556 2343[278 688 500 222 833]2348 2349 556 2350[333 500 387]2353 2355 500 2356 2359 556 2360[439 465 635 222 500 291 556 545 379]2369 2370 356 2371[395 289]2373 2374 206 2375[392 354]2377 2380 125 2381[235]2382 2383 125 2384[303]2385 2386 500 2387 2388 307 2389[353]2390 2391 395 2392[344 191 195 307 402]2397 2398 307 2399[357]2400 2401 328 2402[367 342 395]2405 2408 0 2409[278 358 387 395 381 387 778]2416 2417 667 2418[722 333]2420 2427 570 2428 2435 222 2436 2443 550 2444 2447 222 2448 2451 550 2452[453 667 722]2455 2456 667 2457[556 500 222 755 556 722 333 667]2465 2468 500 2469[222 544 378 667 500 667 500 614 439 686 583]2480 2488 0 2489[943 490 500 556 222 556 667 722 556 278 722 556 667 500 611]2504 2505 500 2506[602 439 652]2509 2514 0 2515[222 723 722 723]2519 2529 0 2530[778 556 944 722 673 0 755 602 1037 841 278 438]2542 2543 191 2544 2545 500 2546 2548 278 2549[333 611]2551 2552 556 2553[384 539 534 556 539 556 519 556 559 556 387]2564 2567 556 2568[562 523 556 560 721 756 746 1167 746 376 657 778 556 222 496 255 556 289]2586 2588 556 2589[376 255 222 555 567 595 613 554 504 648 617 239 431 567 467 722 615 649 553 649 607 553 508 608 551 793 554 553 507 821 833 467 649 554 613 595]2625 2630 555 2631[595]2632 2635 554 2636 2639 239 2640[615]2641 2645 649 2646 2649 608 2650[553]2651 2653 555 2654 2657 595 2658 2659 613 2660 2664 554 2665 2668 648 2669[617 618]2671 2675 239 2676[658 431 567]2679 2682 467 2683 2685 615 2686[620]2687 2689 649 2690 2692 607 2693 2697 553 2698 2700 508 2701[507]2702 2707 608 2708 2711 793 2712 2714 553 2715 2717 507 2718[555 821 649 555 567 460 555 554 507 617 649 239 567 544 722 615 523 649 612 553 518 508 553 659 554 658 649 555 554 617 239 649 553 649 239 553 554 710 460 597 553]2759 2760 239 2761[431 869 839 731 511 548 612 555 565 567 460 551 554 791 515]2776 2777 612 2778[511 566 722 617 649 612 553 595 508 548 631 554 607 561 770 765 676 738 542 597 835 607 392]2801 2813 333 2814 2824 721 2825 2835 756 2836 2848 746 2849 2857 376 2858[481]2859 2861 376 2862 2863 255 2864[292 331 255]2867 2874 376 2875[657]2876 2884 556 2885[222 496]2887 2888 255 2889[301 331 255]2892 2893 289 2894[375 289]2896 2899 556 2900[578]2901 2904 333 2905[602 468 611 458 715 602 667]2912 2913 556 2914[667 966 754 829 717 951 893 667 500 1068 847 1100 831 725 550 673 556]2931 2932 278 2933[557 766 398 612 562 696 561 833 667 755 676 333 556 490 122 357 667 611 278 556 0 399 508 602 643]2958 2959 0 2960[752 722 716 705 723 726 635 722 807 716 660 528 917 758 699 598]2976 2977 706 2978[713 752 716 708 693 722 699 802 746 762 722 688 660 676 677 516 762 686 778 788 274 222 184 200 265 231 514 837 559 580 579 561 580 516 556 697 591 556 233 839 563]3019 3020 556 3021[523 557 548 556 228 555 482 551 352 837 522 575 556 555 837 556 551 391 837 572 557 744 719 278 324]3046 3047 1001 3048[727]3049 3052 1111 3053[1333 556 500 722 550 1284 1017 729 556 686 564 813 737 530 744 747 539 765 808 278 209 278 209 722 556 830 627]3080 3081 552 3082 3083 516 3084 3085 586 3086[504 553 1155 902 1167 922 1020 886 942 734 942 734 942 734 722 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 651 310 556 222 802 611 878 651 1333 952 667 556 824 698 931 805 778 556 979 748 581 410]3130 3131 582 3132[667 500 944 722 549 494 667 556 667 556 509 408]3144 3145 445 3146 3147 501 3148 3149 561 3150[327 677 345 961 680 333 750 672 476 778 556 405 333]3163 3165 590 3166[556 222 800 599 405 333 644 500 722 444 767 601 722]3179 3180 500 3181[556 789 678 611 278 669 525 714 549 669 525 778 556 667 500 722 556 722 333 667 500 787 614 755 684 667 611 524 735 667 571 1003 779 770 448 639 833 611 667 833 278 1185 570 896 478 556 667 278 556 368 347 242 851]3234 3235 556 3236 3237 548 3238[611]3239 3241 944 3242 3243 952 3244[549 607 333 503 450 627 474 700 291]3253 3254 556 3255 3256 833 3257[613 546 613 594 604 500 604]3264 3265 500 3266[333 383 273 248 415 721 764 944 921 556 649 667 611]]>>
<</Ascent 998/CIDSet 404 0 R/CapHeight 716/Descent -325/Flags 68/FontBBox[-517 -325 1359 998]/FontFamily(Arial)/FontFile2 405 0 R/FontName/KNDESU+Arial,Italic/FontStretch/Normal/FontWeight 400/ItalicAngle -12/StemV 92/Type/FontDescriptor/XHeight 519>>
<</BaseFont/CECJYK+Arial,Italic/CIDSystemInfo 410 0 R/CIDToGIDMap/Identity/DW 1000/FontDescriptor 411 0 R/Subtype/CIDFontType2/Type/Font/W[0[750 0]2 4 278 5[355]6 7 556 8[889 667 191]11 12 333 13[389 584 278 333]17 18 278 19 28 556 29 30 278 31 33 584 34[556 1015]36 37 667 38 39 722 40[667 611 778 722 278 500 667 556 833 722 778 667 778 722 667 611 722 667 944]59 60 667 61[611]62 64 278 65[469 556 333]68 69 556 70[500]71 72 556 73[278]74 75 556 76 77 222 78[500 222 833]81 84 556 85[333 500 278 556 500 722]91 93 500 94[334 260 334 584]98 99 667 100[722 667 722 778 722]105 110 556 111[500]112 115 556 116 119 278 120 130 556 131[400]132 134 556 135[350 537 611]138 139 737 141 142 333 143[549]145[778 713]147 149 549 150[556 576 494 713 823 549 274 370 365 768 889]161 162 611 163[333 584 549 556 549 612]169 170 556 172 173 667 174[778]176[944 556]179 180 333 181 182 222 183[549 494 500 667 167 556]189 190 333 191 192 500 193[556 278 222 333]198 202 667 203 206 278 207 209 778 210 212 722 213[278]214 223 333 224[556 222 667 500 611 500 260 722 556 667 500 667 556]237 238 584 239 241 333 242 244 834 245[556 778 556 278 667 500 722 500 722 500 556 552 333 667 556 667 556 722 625 722 667 556 667]268 269 556 270[222 556 281 556 400 722 556 722 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 667 500 611 278 611 354 722 556 722 556 611 500 611 500 570 778 837 570 556 439 603 374 652 552 500 365 1094]313[500]315[500]317 318 500 319[979 719 584 604 584]324 325 604 326[708 625]328 372 708 373[729 604]376 379 990 380 382 604 383[1021 1052 917]386 387 750 388[531 656 594 510 500 750 733 444 615 188 354 885 323 604]402 403 354 404[604 354 667 556 722 500 722 500 667 556 667 556 667 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 722 556 722 556 278 222 278 222 278 222 278 222 500 222 667]439 440 500 441[556 222 722 556 723 556 778 556 778 556 722 333 667 500 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 944 722 667 500 222 667 556]473[889 778 611 278 944 722 944 722 944 722 667 500 222 333 556 600]489 492 834 493 496 333 497[667 789 846 389 794 865 775 222]505 506 667 507[671 667 611 722 278]512 513 667 514[833 722 648 778 725 667 600 611]522 523 667 524[831 761 278 667 570 439 555 222 550 571 500 463 555 542 222 500 492 548 500 447 556 573 486 550 546 728 779 222 550 556 550 779 667 843 544 708 667]561 562 278 563[500 1066 982 844 589 639 724 667 651 667 544 704 667 917 614]578 579 715 580[589 686 833 722 778 725 667 722 611 639 795 667 727 673 920 923 805 886 651 694 1022 682 556 563 522 493 553 556 688 465]610 611 556 612[472 564 686 550 556 550 556 500 833 500 835 500 572 518 830 851 621 736 526 492 752 534]634 635 556 636[378 496 500]639 641 222 642[910 828 556 472 500 556 492 339]651[1083 670]653 665 0 666[383 0 275]669 670 0 671[278 563 542 399 508 602 247 382 599 590 247 509 461 463 599 601 247 353 574 529 566 546 461 479 550 509 694 643]699 701 493 702[236 417 815 247]706 707 509 708 709 463 710[535]711 714 694 715 717 563 718[542 399 508 602 287 411 590 287 509 461 463 601 353 574 566 546 479 550 509 694 643 247 542 461 546 576]744 763 0 764[556]766[812 604 793 634]770 785 0 786[513]787 788 834 789 822 0 823[222 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 278 222 278 222 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 812 604 812 604 812 604 812 604 812 604 722 556 722 556 793 634 793 634 793 634 793 634 793 634 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 556 278 222 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556]928 931 0 932[544 378 917 688 589 472 589 472 722 550 556 500 556 500 667 500 673 518 673 556 778 556 778 556 247 0 342 493 556 730 651 556 651 556]966 967 722 968[500 722 784 651]972 973 556 974[667 614 611 778 497 879 222 278 667 500 222 492 846 722 556 778 868 667 730 556]994 995 667 996[500 600 333 278 611 278 611 761 722 717 500 611 500]1009 1010 611 1011 1012 500 1013[556 510 438 500 556 260 413 584 278 1333 1222]1024 1025 1056 1026[778 444 1222 944 778 556 667 556 0 667 556]1038[889 778 556 778 556 667 500 778 556 778 556 611 500 222 1333 1222 1056 778 556 1034 618 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556]1069 1072 278 1073[778 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 722 556 722 556 667 500 611 278 545 437 722 556 669]1094 1095 604 1096[611 500 667 556 667 556 778 556 0 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 500]1113 1116 556 1117 1118 500 1119 1121 556 1122[704 439 465 616 509 278]1128 1129 556 1130[550 501 617]1133 1135 556 1136 1137 222 1138[356]1139 1141 222 1142[563]1143 1145 833 1146 1147 556 1148[583 556 766 779 556]1153 1159 333 1160 1161 534 1162[500 291 305 290 348]1167 1168 278 1169[556 563 550 500 722 500 515 500 547]1178 1183 500 1184[778 512 509]1187 1188 550 1189[293 500 448 556]1193 1194 500 1195[927 905 972 671 461 708 751 642 593 485 527]1206 1207 308 1208[122]1209 1211 219 1212[327 510 348 191 355]1217 1219 222 1220 1221 333 1222 1223 356 1224 1227 584 1228 1234 333 1235 1236 278 1237 1244 333 1245[365 93 325 336 356]1250 1254 383 1255 1259 333 1260 1268 542 1269[383]1270 1274 542 1275[383]1276 1280 542 1281[383]1282 1286 542 1287[383]1288 1292 542 1293[383]1294 1302 542 1303[383]1304 1308 542 1309[383]1310 1314 542 1315[383]1316 1320 542 1321[383]1322 1326 542 1327[383]1328 1336 542 1337[383]1338 1342 542 1343[383]1344 1348 542 1349[383]1350 1354 542 1355[383]1356 1360 542 1361[383]1362 1370 542 1371[383]1372 1376 542 1377[383]1378 1382 542 1383[383]1384 1388 542 1389[383]1390 1394 542 1395[383]1396 1399 542 1400 1490 0 1491 1493 333 1494[505 550 716 882 716 556 779 563 778 556 722 500 611 378 625 529 756 577 846 833 673 556 673 512]1518 1519 667 1520[609 596 746 554 415 358 563 579 500 222 778]1531 1532 441 1533[667 715]1535 1536 556 1537[1302 595 760 779 903 694 668 500 878 681 829 685 1024 856 614 465 831 728 778 556 760 590 760 590 1108 918 828 600 1282 876 0 1302 595 722 500 556]1573 1578 0 1579[715 556 651 526 667 556 645 525 614 465 589 472 743 567 891 701 1087 839 722 500 722 500 611 833 897 572 673 518 850 635 850 635 278 917 688 627 520 686 564 722 550 722 550 673 518 833 686 333 667 556 667 556]1632[889 667 556 778 556 917 688 614 465 614 500 715 556 715 556 778 556 778 556 694 492 639 500 639 500 639 500 673 518 886 736 667 556 952 833 937 764 614 465 980 846 1013 831 778 550 732 1114]1679 1716 0 1717[667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 722 500 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 611 278 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 278 222]1763 1764 278 1765[667 500 667 500 667 500 556 222 556 222 556 222 556 222]1779 1784 833 1785[722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 556 667 556 722 333 722 333 722 333 722 333 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 278 611 278 611 278 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 500 667 500 944 722 944 722 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 500 611 500 611 500 556 278 722 500 556 222]1867 1874 570 1875 1876 667 1877 1882 813 1883 1888 439 1889 1890 765 1891 1894 960 1895 1902 555 1903 1904 820 1905 1910 1015 1911 1918 222 1919 1920 375 1921 1926 571 1927 1932 556 1933 1934 827 1935 1936 1022 1937 1938 973 1939 1946 550 1947[813 960 1009 960]1951 1958 779 1959 1960 810 1961 1962 1005 1963 1966 956 1967 1968 570 1969 1970 439 1971 1972 555 1973 1974 222 1975 1976 556 1977 1978 550 1979 1980 779 1981 1988 570 1989 1990 667 1991 1996 813 1997 2004 555 2005 2006 820 2007 2012 1015 2013 2020 779 2021 2022 810 2023 2024 1005 2025 2028 956 2029 2035 570 2036 2040 667 2041 2045 333 2046 2050 555 2051 2052 813 2053 2054 869 2055[722]2056 2058 333 2059 2064 222 2065 2066 278 2067 2068 424 2069 2071 333 2072 2075 550 2076 2077 573 2078 2079 550 2080 2081 667 2082[813 862 765]2085 2087 333 2088 2092 779 2093[924 827 907 810 761]2098 2099 333 2100[556]2101 2102 722 2103[833 722 1130 944 667 611]2110[500 594]2112 2115 0 2116 2117 222 2118[521 667 628 294 629 348]2124 2125 667 2126 2134 333 2135[278]2136 2139 333 2140 2141 397 2142[333]2143 2153 0 2154[667 556 500 717 889]2159 2160 500 2161 2162 555 2163[471 465 222 414 500 448 686 586 556 500 556 500 611 944 457]2178 2179 556 2180[535]2181 2182 534 2183[514 550 556 698 556 500 722 500]2191 2192 465 2193[607 378 500 550 535 728 564 491 717]2202 2203 454 2204[477]2205 2206 452 2207[490 476 161 334 450 376 554 473 474 497 382 438 457 396 444 641]2223 2224 358 2225[354 592 312 396]2229 2230 387 2231 2232 289 2233[392 125 315 500 307 395 355]2240 2241 395 2242[367 195 354 467 526 357 441 398 367 381 438 381 125 191 354 357 398 367 379 438 381 709 655 749 607 609 745 656 789 584]2272 2274 0 2275[556 333 354 500]2280[500]2282[333 250 167 556 278 200 83 0 737 722 833 686 913 883 881 667 722 500 556 611]2302 2303 500 2304[581]2305 2309 0 2310[573]2311 2313 722 2314[544 500]2316 2318 0 2319[353 0]2321 2322 556 2323[278 833]2325 2326 556 2327 2328 333 2329[500 278 500 556 380 557 762]2336 2337 222 2338[556 550 563]2341 2342 556 2343[278 688 500 222 833]2348 2349 556 2350[333 500 387]2353 2355 500 2356 2359 556 2360[439 465 635 222 500 291 556 545 379]2369 2370 356 2371[395 289]2373 2374 206 2375[392 354]2377 2380 125 2381[235]2382 2383 125 2384[303]2385 2386 500 2387 2388 307 2389[353]2390 2391 395 2392[344 191 195 307 402]2397 2398 307 2399[357]2400 2401 328 2402[367 342 395]2405 2408 0 2409[278 358 387 395 381 387 778]2416 2417 667 2418[722 333]2420 2427 570 2428 2435 222 2436 2443 550 2444 2447 222 2448 2451 550 2452[453 667 722]2455 2456 667 2457[556 500 222 755 556 722 333 667]2465 2468 500 2469[222 544 378 667 500 667 500 614 439 686 583]2480 2488 0 2489[943 490 500 556 222 556 667 722 556 278 722 556 667 500 611]2504 2505 500 2506[602 439 652]2509 2514 0 2515[222 723 722 723]2519 2529 0 2530[778 556 944 722 673 0 755 602 1037 841 278 438]2542 2543 191 2544 2545 500 2546 2548 278 2549[333 611]2551 2552 556 2553[384 539 534 556 539 556 519 556 559 556 387]2564 2567 556 2568[562 523 556 560 721 756 746 1167 746 376 657 778 556 222 496 255 556 289]2586 2588 556 2589[376 255 222 555 567 595 613 554 504 648 617 239 431 567 467 722 615 649 553 649 607 553 508 608 551 793 554 553 507 821 833 467 649 554 613 595]2625 2630 555 2631[595]2632 2635 554 2636 2639 239 2640[615]2641 2645 649 2646 2649 608 2650[553]2651 2653 555 2654 2657 595 2658 2659 613 2660 2664 554 2665 2668 648 2669[617 618]2671 2675 239 2676[658 431 567]2679 2682 467 2683 2685 615 2686[620]2687 2689 649 2690 2692 607 2693 2697 553 2698 2700 508 2701[507]2702 2707 608 2708 2711 793 2712 2714 553 2715 2717 507 2718[555 821 649 555 567 460 555 554 507 617 649 239 567 544 722 615 523 649 612 553 518 508 553 659 554 658 649 555 554 617 239 649 553 649 239 553 554 710 460 597 553]2759 2760 239 2761[431 869 839 731 511 548 612 555 565 567 460 551 554 791 515]2776 2777 612 2778[511 566 722 617 649 612 553 595 508 548 631 554 607 561 770 765 676 738 542 597 835 607 392]2801 2813 333 2814 2824 721 2825 2835 756 2836 2848 746 2849 2857 376 2858[481]2859 2861 376 2862 2863 255 2864[292 331 255]2867 2874 376 2875[657]2876 2884 556 2885[222 496]2887 2888 255 2889[301 331 255]2892 2893 289 2894[375 289]2896 2899 556 2900[578]2901 2904 333 2905[602 468 611 458 715 602 667]2912 2913 556 2914[667 966 754 829 717 951 893 667 500 1068 847 1100 831 725 550 673 556]2931 2932 278 2933[557 766 398 612 562 696 561 833 667 755 676 333 556 490 122 357 667 611 278 556 0 399 508 602 643]2958 2959 0 2960[752 722 716 705 723 726 635 722 807 716 660 528 917 758 699 598]2976 2977 706 2978[713 752 716 708 693 722 699 802 746 762 722 688 660 676 677 516 762 686 778 788 274 222 184 200 265 231 514 837 559 580 579 561 580 516 556 697 591 556 233 839 563]3019 3020 556 3021[523 557 548 556 228 555 482 551 352 837 522 575 556 555 837 556 551 391 837 572 557 744 719 278 324]3046 3047 1001 3048[727]3049 3052 1111 3053[1333 556 500 722 550 1284 1017 729 556 686 564 813 737 530 744 747 539 765 808 278 209 278 209 722 556 830 627]3080 3081 552 3082 3083 516 3084 3085 586 3086[504 553 1155 902 1167 922 1020 886 942 734 942 734 942 734 722 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 651 310 556 222 802 611 878 651 1333 952 667 556 824 698 931 805 778 556 979 748 581 410]3130 3131 582 3132[667 500 944 722 549 494 667 556 667 556 509 408]3144 3145 445 3146 3147 501 3148 3149 561 3150[327 677 345 961 680 333 750 672 476 778 556 405 333]3163 3165 590 3166[556 222 800 599 405 333 644 500 722 444 767 601 722]3179 3180 500 3181[556 789 678 611 278 669 525 714 549 669 525 778 556 667 500 722 556 722 333 667 500 787 614 755 684 667 611 524 735 667 571 1003 779 770 448 639 833 611 667 833 278 1185 570 896 478 556 667 278 556 368 347 242 851]3234 3235 556 3236 3237 548 3238[611]3239 3241 944 3242 3243 952 3244[549 607 333 503 450 627 474 700 291]3253 3254 556 3255 3256 833 3257[613 546 613 594 604 500 604]3264 3265 500 3266[333 383 273 248 415 721 764 944 921 556 649 667 611]]>>
<</Ascent 998/CIDSet 412 0 R/CapHeight 716/Descent -325/Flags 68/FontBBox[-517 -325 1359 998]/FontFamily(Arial)/FontFile2 413 0 R/FontName/CECJYK+Arial,Italic/FontStretch/Normal/FontWeight 400/ItalicAngle -12/StemV 92/Type/FontDescriptor/XHeight 519>>
<</BaseFont/HWJPUF+Arial,Italic/CIDSystemInfo 418 0 R/CIDToGIDMap/Identity/DW 1000/FontDescriptor 419 0 R/Subtype/CIDFontType2/Type/Font/W[0[750 0]2 4 278 5[355]6 7 556 8[889 667 191]11 12 333 13[389 584 278 333]17 18 278 19 28 556 29 30 278 31 33 584 34[556 1015]36 37 667 38 39 722 40[667 611 778 722 278 500 667 556 833 722 778 667 778 722 667 611 722 667 944]59 60 667 61[611]62 64 278 65[469 556 333]68 69 556 70[500]71 72 556 73[278]74 75 556 76 77 222 78[500 222 833]81 84 556 85[333 500 278 556 500 722]91 93 500 94[334 260 334 584]98 99 667 100[722 667 722 778 722]105 110 556 111[500]112 115 556 116 119 278 120 130 556 131[400]132 134 556 135[350 537 611]138 139 737 141 142 333 143[549]145[778 713]147 149 549 150[556 576 494 713 823 549 274 370 365 768 889]161 162 611 163[333 584 549 556 549 612]169 170 556 172 173 667 174[778]176[944 556]179 180 333 181 182 222 183[549 494 500 667 167 556]189 190 333 191 192 500 193[556 278 222 333]198 202 667 203 206 278 207 209 778 210 212 722 213[278]214 223 333 224[556 222 667 500 611 500 260 722 556 667 500 667 556]237 238 584 239 241 333 242 244 834 245[556 778 556 278 667 500 722 500 722 500 556 552 333 667 556 667 556 722 625 722 667 556 667]268 269 556 270[222 556 281 556 400 722 556 722 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 667 500 611 278 611 354 722 556 722 556 611 500 611 500 570 778 837 570 556 439 603 374 652 552 500 365 1094]313[500]315[500]317 318 500 319[979 719 584 604 584]324 325 604 326[708 625]328 372 708 373[729 604]376 379 990 380 382 604 383[1021 1052 917]386 387 750 388[531 656 594 510 500 750 733 444 615 188 354 885 323 604]402 403 354 404[604 354 667 556 722 500 722 500 667 556 667 556 667 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 722 556 722 556 278 222 278 222 278 222 278 222 500 222 667]439 440 500 441[556 222 722 556 723 556 778 556 778 556 722 333 667 500 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 944 722 667 500 222 667 556]473[889 778 611 278 944 722 944 722 944 722 667 500 222 333 556 600]489 492 834 493 496 333 497[667 789 846 389 794 865 775 222]505 506 667 507[671 667 611 722 278]512 513 667 514[833 722 648 778 725 667 600 611]522 523 667 524[831 761 278 667 570 439 555 222 550 571 500 463 555 542 222 500 492 548 500 447 556 573 486 550 546 728 779 222 550 556 550 779 667 843 544 708 667]561 562 278 563[500 1066 982 844 589 639 724 667 651 667 544 704 667 917 614]578 579 715 580[589 686 833 722 778 725 667 722 611 639 795 667 727 673 920 923 805 886 651 694 1022 682 556 563 522 493 553 556 688 465]610 611 556 612[472 564 686 550 556 550 556 500 833 500 835 500 572 518 830 851 621 736 526 492 752 534]634 635 556 636[378 496 500]639 641 222 642[910 828 556 472 500 556 492 339]651[1083 670]653 665 0 666[383 0 275]669 670 0 671[278 563 542 399 508 602 247 382 599 590 247 509 461 463 599 601 247 353 574 529 566 546 461 479 550 509 694 643]699 701 493 702[236 417 815 247]706 707 509 708 709 463 710[535]711 714 694 715 717 563 718[542 399 508 602 287 411 590 287 509 461 463 601 353 574 566 546 479 550 509 694 643 247 542 461 546 576]744 763 0 764[556]766[812 604 793 634]770 785 0 786[513]787 788 834 789 822 0 823[222 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 278 222 278 222 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 812 604 812 604 812 604 812 604 812 604 722 556 722 556 793 634 793 634 793 634 793 634 793 634 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 556 278 222 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556]928 931 0 932[544 378 917 688 589 472 589 472 722 550 556 500 556 500 667 500 673 518 673 556 778 556 778 556 247 0 342 493 556 730 651 556 651 556]966 967 722 968[500 722 784 651]972 973 556 974[667 614 611 778 497 879 222 278 667 500 222 492 846 722 556 778 868 667 730 556]994 995 667 996[500 600 333 278 611 278 611 761 722 717 500 611 500]1009 1010 611 1011 1012 500 1013[556 510 438 500 556 260 413 584 278 1333 1222]1024 1025 1056 1026[778 444 1222 944 778 556 667 556 0 667 556]1038[889 778 556 778 556 667 500 778 556 778 556 611 500 222 1333 1222 1056 778 556 1034 618 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556]1069 1072 278 1073[778 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 722 556 722 556 667 500 611 278 545 437 722 556 669]1094 1095 604 1096[611 500 667 556 667 556 778 556 0 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 500]1113 1116 556 1117 1118 500 1119 1121 556 1122[704 439 465 616 509 278]1128 1129 556 1130[550 501 617]1133 1135 556 1136 1137 222 1138[356]1139 1141 222 1142[563]1143 1145 833 1146 1147 556 1148[583 556 766 779 556]1153 1159 333 1160 1161 534 1162[500 291 305 290 348]1167 1168 278 1169[556 563 550 500 722 500 515 500 547]1178 1183 500 1184[778 512 509]1187 1188 550 1189[293 500 448 556]1193 1194 500 1195[927 905 972 671 461 708 751 642 593 485 527]1206 1207 308 1208[122]1209 1211 219 1212[327 510 348 191 355]1217 1219 222 1220 1221 333 1222 1223 356 1224 1227 584 1228 1234 333 1235 1236 278 1237 1244 333 1245[365 93 325 336 356]1250 1254 383 1255 1259 333 1260 1268 542 1269[383]1270 1274 542 1275[383]1276 1280 542 1281[383]1282 1286 542 1287[383]1288 1292 542 1293[383]1294 1302 542 1303[383]1304 1308 542 1309[383]1310 1314 542 1315[383]1316 1320 542 1321[383]1322 1326 542 1327[383]1328 1336 542 1337[383]1338 1342 542 1343[383]1344 1348 542 1349[383]1350 1354 542 1355[383]1356 1360 542 1361[383]1362 1370 542 1371[383]1372 1376 542 1377[383]1378 1382 542 1383[383]1384 1388 542 1389[383]1390 1394 542 1395[383]1396 1399 542 1400 1490 0 1491 1493 333 1494[505 550 716 882 716 556 779 563 778 556 722 500 611 378 625 529 756 577 846 833 673 556 673 512]1518 1519 667 1520[609 596 746 554 415 358 563 579 500 222 778]1531 1532 441 1533[667 715]1535 1536 556 1537[1302 595 760 779 903 694 668 500 878 681 829 685 1024 856 614 465 831 728 778 556 760 590 760 590 1108 918 828 600 1282 876 0 1302 595 722 500 556]1573 1578 0 1579[715 556 651 526 667 556 645 525 614 465 589 472 743 567 891 701 1087 839 722 500 722 500 611 833 897 572 673 518 850 635 850 635 278 917 688 627 520 686 564 722 550 722 550 673 518 833 686 333 667 556 667 556]1632[889 667 556 778 556 917 688 614 465 614 500 715 556 715 556 778 556 778 556 694 492 639 500 639 500 639 500 673 518 886 736 667 556 952 833 937 764 614 465 980 846 1013 831 778 550 732 1114]1679 1716 0 1717[667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 722 500 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 611 278 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 278 222]1763 1764 278 1765[667 500 667 500 667 500 556 222 556 222 556 222 556 222]1779 1784 833 1785[722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 556 667 556 722 333 722 333 722 333 722 333 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 278 611 278 611 278 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 500 667 500 944 722 944 722 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 500 611 500 611 500 556 278 722 500 556 222]1867 1874 570 1875 1876 667 1877 1882 813 1883 1888 439 1889 1890 765 1891 1894 960 1895 1902 555 1903 1904 820 1905 1910 1015 1911 1918 222 1919 1920 375 1921 1926 571 1927 1932 556 1933 1934 827 1935 1936 1022 1937 1938 973 1939 1946 550 1947[813 960 1009 960]1951 1958 779 1959 1960 810 1961 1962 1005 1963 1966 956 1967 1968 570 1969 1970 439 1971 1972 555 1973 1974 222 1975 1976 556 1977 1978 550 1979 1980 779 1981 1988 570 1989 1990 667 1991 1996 813 1997 2004 555 2005 2006 820 2007 2012 1015 2013 2020 779 2021 2022 810 2023 2024 1005 2025 2028 956 2029 2035 570 2036 2040 667 2041 2045 333 2046 2050 555 2051 2052 813 2053 2054 869 2055[722]2056 2058 333 2059 2064 222 2065 2066 278 2067 2068 424 2069 2071 333 2072 2075 550 2076 2077 573 2078 2079 550 2080 2081 667 2082[813 862 765]2085 2087 333 2088 2092 779 2093[924 827 907 810 761]2098 2099 333 2100[556]2101 2102 722 2103[833 722 1130 944 667 611]2110[500 594]2112 2115 0 2116 2117 222 2118[521 667 628 294 629 348]2124 2125 667 2126 2134 333 2135[278]2136 2139 333 2140 2141 397 2142[333]2143 2153 0 2154[667 556 500 717 889]2159 2160 500 2161 2162 555 2163[471 465 222 414 500 448 686 586 556 500 556 500 611 944 457]2178 2179 556 2180[535]2181 2182 534 2183[514 550 556 698 556 500 722 500]2191 2192 465 2193[607 378 500 550 535 728 564 491 717]2202 2203 454 2204[477]2205 2206 452 2207[490 476 161 334 450 376 554 473 474 497 382 438 457 396 444 641]2223 2224 358 2225[354 592 312 396]2229 2230 387 2231 2232 289 2233[392 125 315 500 307 395 355]2240 2241 395 2242[367 195 354 467 526 357 441 398 367 381 438 381 125 191 354 357 398 367 379 438 381 709 655 749 607 609 745 656 789 584]2272 2274 0 2275[556 333 354 500]2280[500]2282[333 250 167 556 278 200 83 0 737 722 833 686 913 883 881 667 722 500 556 611]2302 2303 500 2304[581]2305 2309 0 2310[573]2311 2313 722 2314[544 500]2316 2318 0 2319[353 0]2321 2322 556 2323[278 833]2325 2326 556 2327 2328 333 2329[500 278 500 556 380 557 762]2336 2337 222 2338[556 550 563]2341 2342 556 2343[278 688 500 222 833]2348 2349 556 2350[333 500 387]2353 2355 500 2356 2359 556 2360[439 465 635 222 500 291 556 545 379]2369 2370 356 2371[395 289]2373 2374 206 2375[392 354]2377 2380 125 2381[235]2382 2383 125 2384[303]2385 2386 500 2387 2388 307 2389[353]2390 2391 395 2392[344 191 195 307 402]2397 2398 307 2399[357]2400 2401 328 2402[367 342 395]2405 2408 0 2409[278 358 387 395 381 387 778]2416 2417 667 2418[722 333]2420 2427 570 2428 2435 222 2436 2443 550 2444 2447 222 2448 2451 550 2452[453 667 722]2455 2456 667 2457[556 500 222 755 556 722 333 667]2465 2468 500 2469[222 544 378 667 500 667 500 614 439 686 583]2480 2488 0 2489[943 490 500 556 222 556 667 722 556 278 722 556 667 500 611]2504 2505 500 2506[602 439 652]2509 2514 0 2515[222 723 722 723]2519 2529 0 2530[778 556 944 722 673 0 755 602 1037 841 278 438]2542 2543 191 2544 2545 500 2546 2548 278 2549[333 611]2551 2552 556 2553[384 539 534 556 539 556 519 556 559 556 387]2564 2567 556 2568[562 523 556 560 721 756 746 1167 746 376 657 778 556 222 496 255 556 289]2586 2588 556 2589[376 255 222 555 567 595 613 554 504 648 617 239 431 567 467 722 615 649 553 649 607 553 508 608 551 793 554 553 507 821 833 467 649 554 613 595]2625 2630 555 2631[595]2632 2635 554 2636 2639 239 2640[615]2641 2645 649 2646 2649 608 2650[553]2651 2653 555 2654 2657 595 2658 2659 613 2660 2664 554 2665 2668 648 2669[617 618]2671 2675 239 2676[658 431 567]2679 2682 467 2683 2685 615 2686[620]2687 2689 649 2690 2692 607 2693 2697 553 2698 2700 508 2701[507]2702 2707 608 2708 2711 793 2712 2714 553 2715 2717 507 2718[555 821 649 555 567 460 555 554 507 617 649 239 567 544 722 615 523 649 612 553 518 508 553 659 554 658 649 555 554 617 239 649 553 649 239 553 554 710 460 597 553]2759 2760 239 2761[431 869 839 731 511 548 612 555 565 567 460 551 554 791 515]2776 2777 612 2778[511 566 722 617 649 612 553 595 508 548 631 554 607 561 770 765 676 738 542 597 835 607 392]2801 2813 333 2814 2824 721 2825 2835 756 2836 2848 746 2849 2857 376 2858[481]2859 2861 376 2862 2863 255 2864[292 331 255]2867 2874 376 2875[657]2876 2884 556 2885[222 496]2887 2888 255 2889[301 331 255]2892 2893 289 2894[375 289]2896 2899 556 2900[578]2901 2904 333 2905[602 468 611 458 715 602 667]2912 2913 556 2914[667 966 754 829 717 951 893 667 500 1068 847 1100 831 725 550 673 556]2931 2932 278 2933[557 766 398 612 562 696 561 833 667 755 676 333 556 490 122 357 667 611 278 556 0 399 508 602 643]2958 2959 0 2960[752 722 716 705 723 726 635 722 807 716 660 528 917 758 699 598]2976 2977 706 2978[713 752 716 708 693 722 699 802 746 762 722 688 660 676 677 516 762 686 778 788 274 222 184 200 265 231 514 837 559 580 579 561 580 516 556 697 591 556 233 839 563]3019 3020 556 3021[523 557 548 556 228 555 482 551 352 837 522 575 556 555 837 556 551 391 837 572 557 744 719 278 324]3046 3047 1001 3048[727]3049 3052 1111 3053[1333 556 500 722 550 1284 1017 729 556 686 564 813 737 530 744 747 539 765 808 278 209 278 209 722 556 830 627]3080 3081 552 3082 3083 516 3084 3085 586 3086[504 553 1155 902 1167 922 1020 886 942 734 942 734 942 734 722 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 651 310 556 222 802 611 878 651 1333 952 667 556 824 698 931 805 778 556 979 748 581 410]3130 3131 582 3132[667 500 944 722 549 494 667 556 667 556 509 408]3144 3145 445 3146 3147 501 3148 3149 561 3150[327 677 345 961 680 333 750 672 476 778 556 405 333]3163 3165 590 3166[556 222 800 599 405 333 644 500 722 444 767 601 722]3179 3180 500 3181[556 789 678 611 278 669 525 714 549 669 525 778 556 667 500 722 556 722 333 667 500 787 614 755 684 667 611 524 735 667 571 1003 779 770 448 639 833 611 667 833 278 1185 570 896 478 556 667 278 556 368 347 242 851]3234 3235 556 3236 3237 548 3238[611]3239 3241 944 3242 3243 952 3244[549 607 333 503 450 627 474 700 291]3253 3254 556 3255 3256 833 3257[613 546 613 594 604 500 604]3264 3265 500 3266[333 383 273 248 415 721 764 944 921 556 649 667 611]]>>
<</Ascent 998/CIDSet 420 0 R/CapHeight 716/Descent -325/Flags 68/FontBBox[-517 -325 1359 998]/FontFamily(Arial)/FontFile2 421 0 R/FontName/HWJPUF+Arial,Italic/FontStretch/Normal/FontWeight 400/ItalicAngle -12/StemV 92/Type/FontDescriptor/XHeight 519>>
<</BaseFont/EAALDL+Arial,Italic/CIDSystemInfo 426 0 R/CIDToGIDMap/Identity/DW 1000/FontDescriptor 427 0 R/Subtype/CIDFontType2/Type/Font/W[0[750 0]2 4 278 5[355]6 7 556 8[889 667 191]11 12 333 13[389 584 278 333]17 18 278 19 28 556 29 30 278 31 33 584 34[556 1015]36 37 667 38 39 722 40[667 611 778 722 278 500 667 556 833 722 778 667 778 722 667 611 722 667 944]59 60 667 61[611]62 64 278 65[469 556 333]68 69 556 70[500]71 72 556 73[278]74 75 556 76 77 222 78[500 222 833]81 84 556 85[333 500 278 556 500 722]91 93 500 94[334 260 334 584]98 99 667 100[722 667 722 778 722]105 110 556 111[500]112 115 556 116 119 278 120 130 556 131[400]132 134 556 135[350 537 611]138 139 737 141 142 333 143[549]145[778 713]147 149 549 150[556 576 494 713 823 549 274 370 365 768 889]161 162 611 163[333 584 549 556 549 612]169 170 556 172 173 667 174[778]176[944 556]179 180 333 181 182 222 183[549 494 500 667 167 556]189 190 333 191 192 500 193[556 278 222 333]198 202 667 203 206 278 207 209 778 210 212 722 213[278]214 223 333 224[556 222 667 500 611 500 260 722 556 667 500 667 556]237 238 584 239 241 333 242 244 834 245[556 778 556 278 667 500 722 500 722 500 556 552 333 667 556 667 556 722 625 722 667 556 667]268 269 556 270[222 556 281 556 400 722 556 722 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 667 500 611 278 611 354 722 556 722 556 611 500 611 500 570 778 837 570 556 439 603 374 652 552 500 365 1094]313[500]315[500]317 318 500 319[979 719 584 604 584]324 325 604 326[708 625]328 372 708 373[729 604]376 379 990 380 382 604 383[1021 1052 917]386 387 750 388[531 656 594 510 500 750 733 444 615 188 354 885 323 604]402 403 354 404[604 354 667 556 722 500 722 500 667 556 667 556 667 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 722 556 722 556 278 222 278 222 278 222 278 222 500 222 667]439 440 500 441[556 222 722 556 723 556 778 556 778 556 722 333 667 500 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 944 722 667 500 222 667 556]473[889 778 611 278 944 722 944 722 944 722 667 500 222 333 556 600]489 492 834 493 496 333 497[667 789 846 389 794 865 775 222]505 506 667 507[671 667 611 722 278]512 513 667 514[833 722 648 778 725 667 600 611]522 523 667 524[831 761 278 667 570 439 555 222 550 571 500 463 555 542 222 500 492 548 500 447 556 573 486 550 546 728 779 222 550 556 550 779 667 843 544 708 667]561 562 278 563[500 1066 982 844 589 639 724 667 651 667 544 704 667 917 614]578 579 715 580[589 686 833 722 778 725 667 722 611 639 795 667 727 673 920 923 805 886 651 694 1022 682 556 563 522 493 553 556 688 465]610 611 556 612[472 564 686 550 556 550 556 500 833 500 835 500 572 518 830 851 621 736 526 492 752 534]634 635 556 636[378 496 500]639 641 222 642[910 828 556 472 500 556 492 339]651[1083 670]653 665 0 666[383 0 275]669 670 0 671[278 563 542 399 508 602 247 382 599 590 247 509 461 463 599 601 247 353 574 529 566 546 461 479 550 509 694 643]699 701 493 702[236 417 815 247]706 707 509 708 709 463 710[535]711 714 694 715 717 563 718[542 399 508 602 287 411 590 287 509 461 463 601 353 574 566 546 479 550 509 694 643 247 542 461 546 576]744 763 0 764[556]766[812 604 793 634]770 785 0 786[513]787 788 834 789 822 0 823[222 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 278 222 278 222 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 812 604 812 604 812 604 812 604 812 604 722 556 722 556 793 634 793 634 793 634 793 634 793 634 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 556 278 222 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556]928 931 0 932[544 378 917 688 589 472 589 472 722 550 556 500 556 500 667 500 673 518 673 556 778 556 778 556 247 0 342 493 556 730 651 556 651 556]966 967 722 968[500 722 784 651]972 973 556 974[667 614 611 778 497 879 222 278 667 500 222 492 846 722 556 778 868 667 730 556]994 995 667 996[500 600 333 278 611 278 611 761 722 717 500 611 500]1009 1010 611 1011 1012 500 1013[556 510 438 500 556 260 413 584 278 1333 1222]1024 1025 1056 1026[778 444 1222 944 778 556 667 556 0 667 556]1038[889 778 556 778 556 667 500 778 556 778 556 611 500 222 1333 1222 1056 778 556 1034 618 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556]1069 1072 278 1073[778 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 722 556 722 556 667 500 611 278 545 437 722 556 669]1094 1095 604 1096[611 500 667 556 667 556 778 556 0 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 500]1113 1116 556 1117 1118 500 1119 1121 556 1122[704 439 465 616 509 278]1128 1129 556 1130[550 501 617]1133 1135 556 1136 1137 222 1138[356]1139 1141 222 1142[563]1143 1145 833 1146 1147 556 1148[583 556 766 779 556]1153 1159 333 1160 1161 534 1162[500 291 305 290 348]1167 1168 278 1169[556 563 550 500 722 500 515 500 547]1178 1183 500 1184[778 512 509]1187 1188 550 1189[293 500 448 556]1193 1194 500 1195[927 905 972 671 461 708 751 642 593 485 527]1206 1207 308 1208[122]1209 1211 219 1212[327 510 348 191 355]1217 1219 222 1220 1221 333 1222 1223 356 1224 1227 584 1228 1234 333 1235 1236 278 1237 1244 333 1245[365 93 325 336 356]1250 1254 383 1255 1259 333 1260 1268 542 1269[383]1270 1274 542 1275[383]1276 1280 542 1281[383]1282 1286 542 1287[383]1288 1292 542 1293[383]1294 1302 542 1303[383]1304 1308 542 1309[383]1310 1314 542 1315[383]1316 1320 542 1321[383]1322 1326 542 1327[383]1328 1336 542 1337[383]1338 1342 542 1343[383]1344 1348 542 1349[383]1350 1354 542 1355[383]1356 1360 542 1361[383]1362 1370 542 1371[383]1372 1376 542 1377[383]1378 1382 542 1383[383]1384 1388 542 1389[383]1390 1394 542 1395[383]1396 1399 542 1400 1490 0 1491 1493 333 1494[505 550 716 882 716 556 779 563 778 556 722 500 611 378 625 529 756 577 846 833 673 556 673 512]1518 1519 667 1520[609 596 746 554 415 358 563 579 500 222 778]1531 1532 441 1533[667 715]1535 1536 556 1537[1302 595 760 779 903 694 668 500 878 681 829 685 1024 856 614 465 831 728 778 556 760 590 760 590 1108 918 828 600 1282 876 0 1302 595 722 500 556]1573 1578 0 1579[715 556 651 526 667 556 645 525 614 465 589 472 743 567 891 701 1087 839 722 500 722 500 611 833 897 572 673 518 850 635 850 635 278 917 688 627 520 686 564 722 550 722 550 673 518 833 686 333 667 556 667 556]1632[889 667 556 778 556 917 688 614 465 614 500 715 556 715 556 778 556 778 556 694 492 639 500 639 500 639 500 673 518 886 736 667 556 952 833 937 764 614 465 980 846 1013 831 778 550 732 1114]1679 1716 0 1717[667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 722 500 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 611 278 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 278 222]1763 1764 278 1765[667 500 667 500 667 500 556 222 556 222 556 222 556 222]1779 1784 833 1785[722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 556 667 556 722 333 722 333 722 333 722 333 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 278 611 278 611 278 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 500 667 500 944 722 944 722 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 500 611 500 611 500 556 278 722 500 556 222]1867 1874 570 1875 1876 667 1877 1882 813 1883 1888 439 1889 1890 765 1891 1894 960 1895 1902 555 1903 1904 820 1905 1910 1015 1911 1918 222 1919 1920 375 1921 1926 571 1927 1932 556 1933 1934 827 1935 1936 1022 1937 1938 973 1939 1946 550 1947[813 960 1009 960]1951 1958 779 1959 1960 810 1961 1962 1005 1963 1966 956 1967 1968 570 1969 1970 439 1971 1972 555 1973 1974 222 1975 1976 556 1977 1978 550 1979 1980 779 1981 1988 570 1989 1990 667 1991 1996 813 1997 2004 555 2005 2006 820 2007 2012 1015 2013 2020 779 2021 2022 810 2023 2024 1005 2025 2028 956 2029 2035 570 2036 2040 667 2041 2045 333 2046 2050 555 2051 2052 813 2053 2054 869 2055[722]2056 2058 333 2059 2064 222 2065 2066 278 2067 2068 424 2069 2071 333 2072 2075 550 2076 2077 573 2078 2079 550 2080 2081 667 2082[813 862 765]2085 2087 333 2088 2092 779 2093[924 827 907 810 761]2098 2099 333 2100[556]2101 2102 722 2103[833 722 1130 944 667 611]2110[500 594]2112 2115 0 2116 2117 222 2118[521 667 628 294 629 348]2124 2125 667 2126 2134 333 2135[278]2136 2139 333 2140 2141 397 2142[333]2143 2153 0 2154[667 556 500 717 889]2159 2160 500 2161 2162 555 2163[471 465 222 414 500 448 686 586 556 500 556 500 611 944 457]2178 2179 556 2180[535]2181 2182 534 2183[514 550 556 698 556 500 722 500]2191 2192 465 2193[607 378 500 550 535 728 564 491 717]2202 2203 454 2204[477]2205 2206 452 2207[490 476 161 334 450 376 554 473 474 497 382 438 457 396 444 641]2223 2224 358 2225[354 592 312 396]2229 2230 387 2231 2232 289 2233[392 125 315 500 307 395 355]2240 2241 395 2242[367 195 354 467 526 357 441 398 367 381 438 381 125 191 354 357 398 367 379 438 381 709 655 749 607 609 745 656 789 584]2272 2274 0 2275[556 333 354 500]2280[500]2282[333 250 167 556 278 200 83 0 737 722 833 686 913 883 881 667 722 500 556 611]2302 2303 500 2304[581]2305 2309 0 2310[573]2311 2313 722 2314[544 500]2316 2318 0 2319[353 0]2321 2322 556 2323[278 833]2325 2326 556 2327 2328 333 2329[500 278 500 556 380 557 762]2336 2337 222 2338[556 550 563]2341 2342 556 2343[278 688 500 222 833]2348 2349 556 2350[333 500 387]2353 2355 500 2356 2359 556 2360[439 465 635 222 500 291 556 545 379]2369 2370 356 2371[395 289]2373 2374 206 2375[392 354]2377 2380 125 2381[235]2382 2383 125 2384[303]2385 2386 500 2387 2388 307 2389[353]2390 2391 395 2392[344 191 195 307 402]2397 2398 307 2399[357]2400 2401 328 2402[367 342 395]2405 2408 0 2409[278 358 387 395 381 387 778]2416 2417 667 2418[722 333]2420 2427 570 2428 2435 222 2436 2443 550 2444 2447 222 2448 2451 550 2452[453 667 722]2455 2456 667 2457[556 500 222 755 556 722 333 667]2465 2468 500 2469[222 544 378 667 500 667 500 614 439 686 583]2480 2488 0 2489[943 490 500 556 222 556 667 722 556 278 722 556 667 500 611]2504 2505 500 2506[602 439 652]2509 2514 0 2515[222 723 722 723]2519 2529 0 2530[778 556 944 722 673 0 755 602 1037 841 278 438]2542 2543 191 2544 2545 500 2546 2548 278 2549[333 611]2551 2552 556 2553[384 539 534 556 539 556 519 556 559 556 387]2564 2567 556 2568[562 523 556 560 721 756 746 1167 746 376 657 778 556 222 496 255 556 289]2586 2588 556 2589[376 255 222 555 567 595 613 554 504 648 617 239 431 567 467 722 615 649 553 649 607 553 508 608 551 793 554 553 507 821 833 467 649 554 613 595]2625 2630 555 2631[595]2632 2635 554 2636 2639 239 2640[615]2641 2645 649 2646 2649 608 2650[553]2651 2653 555 2654 2657 595 2658 2659 613 2660 2664 554 2665 2668 648 2669[617 618]2671 2675 239 2676[658 431 567]2679 2682 467 2683 2685 615 2686[620]2687 2689 649 2690 2692 607 2693 2697 553 2698 2700 508 2701[507]2702 2707 608 2708 2711 793 2712 2714 553 2715 2717 507 2718[555 821 649 555 567 460 555 554 507 617 649 239 567 544 722 615 523 649 612 553 518 508 553 659 554 658 649 555 554 617 239 649 553 649 239 553 554 710 460 597 553]2759 2760 239 2761[431 869 839 731 511 548 612 555 565 567 460 551 554 791 515]2776 2777 612 2778[511 566 722 617 649 612 553 595 508 548 631 554 607 561 770 765 676 738 542 597 835 607 392]2801 2813 333 2814 2824 721 2825 2835 756 2836 2848 746 2849 2857 376 2858[481]2859 2861 376 2862 2863 255 2864[292 331 255]2867 2874 376 2875[657]2876 2884 556 2885[222 496]2887 2888 255 2889[301 331 255]2892 2893 289 2894[375 289]2896 2899 556 2900[578]2901 2904 333 2905[602 468 611 458 715 602 667]2912 2913 556 2914[667 966 754 829 717 951 893 667 500 1068 847 1100 831 725 550 673 556]2931 2932 278 2933[557 766 398 612 562 696 561 833 667 755 676 333 556 490 122 357 667 611 278 556 0 399 508 602 643]2958 2959 0 2960[752 722 716 705 723 726 635 722 807 716 660 528 917 758 699 598]2976 2977 706 2978[713 752 716 708 693 722 699 802 746 762 722 688 660 676 677 516 762 686 778 788 274 222 184 200 265 231 514 837 559 580 579 561 580 516 556 697 591 556 233 839 563]3019 3020 556 3021[523 557 548 556 228 555 482 551 352 837 522 575 556 555 837 556 551 391 837 572 557 744 719 278 324]3046 3047 1001 3048[727]3049 3052 1111 3053[1333 556 500 722 550 1284 1017 729 556 686 564 813 737 530 744 747 539 765 808 278 209 278 209 722 556 830 627]3080 3081 552 3082 3083 516 3084 3085 586 3086[504 553 1155 902 1167 922 1020 886 942 734 942 734 942 734 722 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 651 310 556 222 802 611 878 651 1333 952 667 556 824 698 931 805 778 556 979 748 581 410]3130 3131 582 3132[667 500 944 722 549 494 667 556 667 556 509 408]3144 3145 445 3146 3147 501 3148 3149 561 3150[327 677 345 961 680 333 750 672 476 778 556 405 333]3163 3165 590 3166[556 222 800 599 405 333 644 500 722 444 767 601 722]3179 3180 500 3181[556 789 678 611 278 669 525 714 549 669 525 778 556 667 500 722 556 722 333 667 500 787 614 755 684 667 611 524 735 667 571 1003 779 770 448 639 833 611 667 833 278 1185 570 896 478 556 667 278 556 368 347 242 851]3234 3235 556 3236 3237 548 3238[611]3239 3241 944 3242 3243 952 3244[549 607 333 503 450 627 474 700 291]3253 3254 556 3255 3256 833 3257[613 546 613 594 604 500 604]3264 3265 500 3266[333 383 273 248 415 721 764 944 921 556 649 667 611]]>>
<</Ascent 998/CIDSet 428 0 R/CapHeight 716/Descent -325/Flags 68/FontBBox[-517 -325 1359 998]/FontFamily(Arial)/FontFile2 429 0 R/FontName/EAALDL+Arial,Italic/FontStretch/Normal/FontWeight 400/ItalicAngle -12/StemV 92/Type/FontDescriptor/XHeight 519>>
<</BaseFont/ZBTMKV+Arial,Italic/CIDSystemInfo 434 0 R/CIDToGIDMap/Identity/DW 1000/FontDescriptor 435 0 R/Subtype/CIDFontType2/Type/Font/W[0[750 0]2 4 278 5[355]6 7 556 8[889 667 191]11 12 333 13[389 584 278 333]17 18 278 19 28 556 29 30 278 31 33 584 34[556 1015]36 37 667 38 39 722 40[667 611 778 722 278 500 667 556 833 722 778 667 778 722 667 611 722 667 944]59 60 667 61[611]62 64 278 65[469 556 333]68 69 556 70[500]71 72 556 73[278]74 75 556 76 77 222 78[500 222 833]81 84 556 85[333 500 278 556 500 722]91 93 500 94[334 260 334 584]98 99 667 100[722 667 722 778 722]105 110 556 111[500]112 115 556 116 119 278 120 130 556 131[400]132 134 556 135[350 537 611]138 139 737 141 142 333 143[549]145[778 713]147 149 549 150[556 576 494 713 823 549 274 370 365 768 889]161 162 611 163[333 584 549 556 549 612]169 170 556 172 173 667 174[778]176[944 556]179 180 333 181 182 222 183[549 494 500 667 167 556]189 190 333 191 192 500 193[556 278 222 333]198 202 667 203 206 278 207 209 778 210 212 722 213[278]214 223 333 224[556 222 667 500 611 500 260 722 556 667 500 667 556]237 238 584 239 241 333 242 244 834 245[556 778 556 278 667 500 722 500 722 500 556 552 333 667 556 667 556 722 625 722 667 556 667]268 269 556 270[222 556 281 556 400 722 556 722 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 667 500 611 278 611 354 722 556 722 556 611 500 611 500 570 778 837 570 556 439 603 374 652 552 500 365 1094]313[500]315[500]317 318 500 319[979 719 584 604 584]324 325 604 326[708 625]328 372 708 373[729 604]376 379 990 380 382 604 383[1021 1052 917]386 387 750 388[531 656 594 510 500 750 733 444 615 188 354 885 323 604]402 403 354 404[604 354 667 556 722 500 722 500 667 556 667 556 667 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 722 556 722 556 278 222 278 222 278 222 278 222 500 222 667]439 440 500 441[556 222 722 556 723 556 778 556 778 556 722 333 667 500 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 944 722 667 500 222 667 556]473[889 778 611 278 944 722 944 722 944 722 667 500 222 333 556 600]489 492 834 493 496 333 497[667 789 846 389 794 865 775 222]505 506 667 507[671 667 611 722 278]512 513 667 514[833 722 648 778 725 667 600 611]522 523 667 524[831 761 278 667 570 439 555 222 550 571 500 463 555 542 222 500 492 548 500 447 556 573 486 550 546 728 779 222 550 556 550 779 667 843 544 708 667]561 562 278 563[500 1066 982 844 589 639 724 667 651 667 544 704 667 917 614]578 579 715 580[589 686 833 722 778 725 667 722 611 639 795 667 727 673 920 923 805 886 651 694 1022 682 556 563 522 493 553 556 688 465]610 611 556 612[472 564 686 550 556 550 556 500 833 500 835 500 572 518 830 851 621 736 526 492 752 534]634 635 556 636[378 496 500]639 641 222 642[910 828 556 472 500 556 492 339]651[1083 670]653 665 0 666[383 0 275]669 670 0 671[278 563 542 399 508 602 247 382 599 590 247 509 461 463 599 601 247 353 574 529 566 546 461 479 550 509 694 643]699 701 493 702[236 417 815 247]706 707 509 708 709 463 710[535]711 714 694 715 717 563 718[542 399 508 602 287 411 590 287 509 461 463 601 353 574 566 546 479 550 509 694 643 247 542 461 546 576]744 763 0 764[556]766[812 604 793 634]770 785 0 786[513]787 788 834 789 822 0 823[222 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 278 222 278 222 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 812 604 812 604 812 604 812 604 812 604 722 556 722 556 793 634 793 634 793 634 793 634 793 634 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 556 278 222 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556]928 931 0 932[544 378 917 688 589 472 589 472 722 550 556 500 556 500 667 500 673 518 673 556 778 556 778 556 247 0 342 493 556 730 651 556 651 556]966 967 722 968[500 722 784 651]972 973 556 974[667 614 611 778 497 879 222 278 667 500 222 492 846 722 556 778 868 667 730 556]994 995 667 996[500 600 333 278 611 278 611 761 722 717 500 611 500]1009 1010 611 1011 1012 500 1013[556 510 438 500 556 260 413 584 278 1333 1222]1024 1025 1056 1026[778 444 1222 944 778 556 667 556 0 667 556]1038[889 778 556 778 556 667 500 778 556 778 556 611 500 222 1333 1222 1056 778 556 1034 618 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556]1069 1072 278 1073[778 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 722 556 722 556 667 500 611 278 545 437 722 556 669]1094 1095 604 1096[611 500 667 556 667 556 778 556 0 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 500]1113 1116 556 1117 1118 500 1119 1121 556 1122[704 439 465 616 509 278]1128 1129 556 1130[550 501 617]1133 1135 556 1136 1137 222 1138[356]1139 1141 222 1142[563]1143 1145 833 1146 1147 556 1148[583 556 766 779 556]1153 1159 333 1160 1161 534 1162[500 291 305 290 348]1167 1168 278 1169[556 563 550 500 722 500 515 500 547]1178 1183 500 1184[778 512 509]1187 1188 550 1189[293 500 448 556]1193 1194 500 1195[927 905 972 671 461 708 751 642 593 485 527]1206 1207 308 1208[122]1209 1211 219 1212[327 510 348 191 355]1217 1219 222 1220 1221 333 1222 1223 356 1224 1227 584 1228 1234 333 1235 1236 278 1237 1244 333 1245[365 93 325 336 356]1250 1254 383 1255 1259 333 1260 1268 542 1269[383]1270 1274 542 1275[383]1276 1280 542 1281[383]1282 1286 542 1287[383]1288 1292 542 1293[383]1294 1302 542 1303[383]1304 1308 542 1309[383]1310 1314 542 1315[383]1316 1320 542 1321[383]1322 1326 542 1327[383]1328 1336 542 1337[383]1338 1342 542 1343[383]1344 1348 542 1349[383]1350 1354 542 1355[383]1356 1360 542 1361[383]1362 1370 542 1371[383]1372 1376 542 1377[383]1378 1382 542 1383[383]1384 1388 542 1389[383]1390 1394 542 1395[383]1396 1399 542 1400 1490 0 1491 1493 333 1494[505 550 716 882 716 556 779 563 778 556 722 500 611 378 625 529 756 577 846 833 673 556 673 512]1518 1519 667 1520[609 596 746 554 415 358 563 579 500 222 778]1531 1532 441 1533[667 715]1535 1536 556 1537[1302 595 760 779 903 694 668 500 878 681 829 685 1024 856 614 465 831 728 778 556 760 590 760 590 1108 918 828 600 1282 876 0 1302 595 722 500 556]1573 1578 0 1579[715 556 651 526 667 556 645 525 614 465 589 472 743 567 891 701 1087 839 722 500 722 500 611 833 897 572 673 518 850 635 850 635 278 917 688 627 520 686 564 722 550 722 550 673 518 833 686 333 667 556 667 556]1632[889 667 556 778 556 917 688 614 465 614 500 715 556 715 556 778 556 778 556 694 492 639 500 639 500 639 500 673 518 886 736 667 556 952 833 937 764 614 465 980 846 1013 831 778 550 732 1114]1679 1716 0 1717[667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 722 500 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 611 278 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 278 222]1763 1764 278 1765[667 500 667 500 667 500 556 222 556 222 556 222 556 222]1779 1784 833 1785[722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 556 667 556 722 333 722 333 722 333 722 333 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 278 611 278 611 278 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 500 667 500 944 722 944 722 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 500 611 500 611 500 556 278 722 500 556 222]1867 1874 570 1875 1876 667 1877 1882 813 1883 1888 439 1889 1890 765 1891 1894 960 1895 1902 555 1903 1904 820 1905 1910 1015 1911 1918 222 1919 1920 375 1921 1926 571 1927 1932 556 1933 1934 827 1935 1936 1022 1937 1938 973 1939 1946 550 1947[813 960 1009 960]1951 1958 779 1959 1960 810 1961 1962 1005 1963 1966 956 1967 1968 570 1969 1970 439 1971 1972 555 1973 1974 222 1975 1976 556 1977 1978 550 1979 1980 779 1981 1988 570 1989 1990 667 1991 1996 813 1997 2004 555 2005 2006 820 2007 2012 1015 2013 2020 779 2021 2022 810 2023 2024 1005 2025 2028 956 2029 2035 570 2036 2040 667 2041 2045 333 2046 2050 555 2051 2052 813 2053 2054 869 2055[722]2056 2058 333 2059 2064 222 2065 2066 278 2067 2068 424 2069 2071 333 2072 2075 550 2076 2077 573 2078 2079 550 2080 2081 667 2082[813 862 765]2085 2087 333 2088 2092 779 2093[924 827 907 810 761]2098 2099 333 2100[556]2101 2102 722 2103[833 722 1130 944 667 611]2110[500 594]2112 2115 0 2116 2117 222 2118[521 667 628 294 629 348]2124 2125 667 2126 2134 333 2135[278]2136 2139 333 2140 2141 397 2142[333]2143 2153 0 2154[667 556 500 717 889]2159 2160 500 2161 2162 555 2163[471 465 222 414 500 448 686 586 556 500 556 500 611 944 457]2178 2179 556 2180[535]2181 2182 534 2183[514 550 556 698 556 500 722 500]2191 2192 465 2193[607 378 500 550 535 728 564 491 717]2202 2203 454 2204[477]2205 2206 452 2207[490 476 161 334 450 376 554 473 474 497 382 438 457 396 444 641]2223 2224 358 2225[354 592 312 396]2229 2230 387 2231 2232 289 2233[392 125 315 500 307 395 355]2240 2241 395 2242[367 195 354 467 526 357 441 398 367 381 438 381 125 191 354 357 398 367 379 438 381 709 655 749 607 609 745 656 789 584]2272 2274 0 2275[556 333 354 500]2280[500]2282[333 250 167 556 278 200 83 0 737 722 833 686 913 883 881 667 722 500 556 611]2302 2303 500 2304[581]2305 2309 0 2310[573]2311 2313 722 2314[544 500]2316 2318 0 2319[353 0]2321 2322 556 2323[278 833]2325 2326 556 2327 2328 333 2329[500 278 500 556 380 557 762]2336 2337 222 2338[556 550 563]2341 2342 556 2343[278 688 500 222 833]2348 2349 556 2350[333 500 387]2353 2355 500 2356 2359 556 2360[439 465 635 222 500 291 556 545 379]2369 2370 356 2371[395 289]2373 2374 206 2375[392 354]2377 2380 125 2381[235]2382 2383 125 2384[303]2385 2386 500 2387 2388 307 2389[353]2390 2391 395 2392[344 191 195 307 402]2397 2398 307 2399[357]2400 2401 328 2402[367 342 395]2405 2408 0 2409[278 358 387 395 381 387 778]2416 2417 667 2418[722 333]2420 2427 570 2428 2435 222 2436 2443 550 2444 2447 222 2448 2451 550 2452[453 667 722]2455 2456 667 2457[556 500 222 755 556 722 333 667]2465 2468 500 2469[222 544 378 667 500 667 500 614 439 686 583]2480 2488 0 2489[943 490 500 556 222 556 667 722 556 278 722 556 667 500 611]2504 2505 500 2506[602 439 652]2509 2514 0 2515[222 723 722 723]2519 2529 0 2530[778 556 944 722 673 0 755 602 1037 841 278 438]2542 2543 191 2544 2545 500 2546 2548 278 2549[333 611]2551 2552 556 2553[384 539 534 556 539 556 519 556 559 556 387]2564 2567 556 2568[562 523 556 560 721 756 746 1167 746 376 657 778 556 222 496 255 556 289]2586 2588 556 2589[376 255 222 555 567 595 613 554 504 648 617 239 431 567 467 722 615 649 553 649 607 553 508 608 551 793 554 553 507 821 833 467 649 554 613 595]2625 2630 555 2631[595]2632 2635 554 2636 2639 239 2640[615]2641 2645 649 2646 2649 608 2650[553]2651 2653 555 2654 2657 595 2658 2659 613 2660 2664 554 2665 2668 648 2669[617 618]2671 2675 239 2676[658 431 567]2679 2682 467 2683 2685 615 2686[620]2687 2689 649 2690 2692 607 2693 2697 553 2698 2700 508 2701[507]2702 2707 608 2708 2711 793 2712 2714 553 2715 2717 507 2718[555 821 649 555 567 460 555 554 507 617 649 239 567 544 722 615 523 649 612 553 518 508 553 659 554 658 649 555 554 617 239 649 553 649 239 553 554 710 460 597 553]2759 2760 239 2761[431 869 839 731 511 548 612 555 565 567 460 551 554 791 515]2776 2777 612 2778[511 566 722 617 649 612 553 595 508 548 631 554 607 561 770 765 676 738 542 597 835 607 392]2801 2813 333 2814 2824 721 2825 2835 756 2836 2848 746 2849 2857 376 2858[481]2859 2861 376 2862 2863 255 2864[292 331 255]2867 2874 376 2875[657]2876 2884 556 2885[222 496]2887 2888 255 2889[301 331 255]2892 2893 289 2894[375 289]2896 2899 556 2900[578]2901 2904 333 2905[602 468 611 458 715 602 667]2912 2913 556 2914[667 966 754 829 717 951 893 667 500 1068 847 1100 831 725 550 673 556]2931 2932 278 2933[557 766 398 612 562 696 561 833 667 755 676 333 556 490 122 357 667 611 278 556 0 399 508 602 643]2958 2959 0 2960[752 722 716 705 723 726 635 722 807 716 660 528 917 758 699 598]2976 2977 706 2978[713 752 716 708 693 722 699 802 746 762 722 688 660 676 677 516 762 686 778 788 274 222 184 200 265 231 514 837 559 580 579 561 580 516 556 697 591 556 233 839 563]3019 3020 556 3021[523 557 548 556 228 555 482 551 352 837 522 575 556 555 837 556 551 391 837 572 557 744 719 278 324]3046 3047 1001 3048[727]3049 3052 1111 3053[1333 556 500 722 550 1284 1017 729 556 686 564 813 737 530 744 747 539 765 808 278 209 278 209 722 556 830 627]3080 3081 552 3082 3083 516 3084 3085 586 3086[504 553 1155 902 1167 922 1020 886 942 734 942 734 942 734 722 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 651 310 556 222 802 611 878 651 1333 952 667 556 824 698 931 805 778 556 979 748 581 410]3130 3131 582 3132[667 500 944 722 549 494 667 556 667 556 509 408]3144 3145 445 3146 3147 501 3148 3149 561 3150[327 677 345 961 680 333 750 672 476 778 556 405 333]3163 3165 590 3166[556 222 800 599 405 333 644 500 722 444 767 601 722]3179 3180 500 3181[556 789 678 611 278 669 525 714 549 669 525 778 556 667 500 722 556 722 333 667 500 787 614 755 684 667 611 524 735 667 571 1003 779 770 448 639 833 611 667 833 278 1185 570 896 478 556 667 278 556 368 347 242 851]3234 3235 556 3236 3237 548 3238[611]3239 3241 944 3242 3243 952 3244[549 607 333 503 450 627 474 700 291]3253 3254 556 3255 3256 833 3257[613 546 613 594 604 500 604]3264 3265 500 3266[333 383 273 248 415 721 764 944 921 556 649 667 611]]>>
<</Ascent 998/CIDSet 436 0 R/CapHeight 716/Descent -325/Flags 68/FontBBox[-517 -325 1359 998]/FontFamily(Arial)/FontFile2 437 0 R/FontName/ZBTMKV+Arial,Italic/FontStretch/Normal/FontWeight 400/ItalicAngle -12/StemV 92/Type/FontDescriptor/XHeight 519>>
<</BaseFont/WEHNYB+Arial,Italic/CIDSystemInfo 442 0 R/CIDToGIDMap/Identity/DW 1000/FontDescriptor 443 0 R/Subtype/CIDFontType2/Type/Font/W[0[750 0]2 4 278 5[355]6 7 556 8[889 667 191]11 12 333 13[389 584 278 333]17 18 278 19 28 556 29 30 278 31 33 584 34[556 1015]36 37 667 38 39 722 40[667 611 778 722 278 500 667 556 833 722 778 667 778 722 667 611 722 667 944]59 60 667 61[611]62 64 278 65[469 556 333]68 69 556 70[500]71 72 556 73[278]74 75 556 76 77 222 78[500 222 833]81 84 556 85[333 500 278 556 500 722]91 93 500 94[334 260 334 584]98 99 667 100[722 667 722 778 722]105 110 556 111[500]112 115 556 116 119 278 120 130 556 131[400]132 134 556 135[350 537 611]138 139 737 141 142 333 143[549]145[778 713]147 149 549 150[556 576 494 713 823 549 274 370 365 768 889]161 162 611 163[333 584 549 556 549 612]169 170 556 172 173 667 174[778]176[944 556]179 180 333 181 182 222 183[549 494 500 667 167 556]189 190 333 191 192 500 193[556 278 222 333]198 202 667 203 206 278 207 209 778 210 212 722 213[278]214 223 333 224[556 222 667 500 611 500 260 722 556 667 500 667 556]237 238 584 239 241 333 242 244 834 245[556 778 556 278 667 500 722 500 722 500 556 552 333 667 556 667 556 722 625 722 667 556 667]268 269 556 270[222 556 281 556 400 722 556 722 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 667 500 611 278 611 354 722 556 722 556 611 500 611 500 570 778 837 570 556 439 603 374 652 552 500 365 1094]313[500]315[500]317 318 500 319[979 719 584 604 584]324 325 604 326[708 625]328 372 708 373[729 604]376 379 990 380 382 604 383[1021 1052 917]386 387 750 388[531 656 594 510 500 750 733 444 615 188 354 885 323 604]402 403 354 404[604 354 667 556 722 500 722 500 667 556 667 556 667 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 722 556 722 556 278 222 278 222 278 222 278 222 500 222 667]439 440 500 441[556 222 722 556 723 556 778 556 778 556 722 333 667 500 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 944 722 667 500 222 667 556]473[889 778 611 278 944 722 944 722 944 722 667 500 222 333 556 600]489 492 834 493 496 333 497[667 789 846 389 794 865 775 222]505 506 667 507[671 667 611 722 278]512 513 667 514[833 722 648 778 725 667 600 611]522 523 667 524[831 761 278 667 570 439 555 222 550 571 500 463 555 542 222 500 492 548 500 447 556 573 486 550 546 728 779 222 550 556 550 779 667 843 544 708 667]561 562 278 563[500 1066 982 844 589 639 724 667 651 667 544 704 667 917 614]578 579 715 580[589 686 833 722 778 725 667 722 611 639 795 667 727 673 920 923 805 886 651 694 1022 682 556 563 522 493 553 556 688 465]610 611 556 612[472 564 686 550 556 550 556 500 833 500 835 500 572 518 830 851 621 736 526 492 752 534]634 635 556 636[378 496 500]639 641 222 642[910 828 556 472 500 556 492 339]651[1083 670]653 665 0 666[383 0 275]669 670 0 671[278 563 542 399 508 602 247 382 599 590 247 509 461 463 599 601 247 353 574 529 566 546 461 479 550 509 694 643]699 701 493 702[236 417 815 247]706 707 509 708 709 463 710[535]711 714 694 715 717 563 718[542 399 508 602 287 411 590 287 509 461 463 601 353 574 566 546 479 550 509 694 643 247 542 461 546 576]744 763 0 764[556]766[812 604 793 634]770 785 0 786[513]787 788 834 789 822 0 823[222 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 278 222 278 222 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 812 604 812 604 812 604 812 604 812 604 722 556 722 556 793 634 793 634 793 634 793 634 793 634 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 556 278 222 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556]928 931 0 932[544 378 917 688 589 472 589 472 722 550 556 500 556 500 667 500 673 518 673 556 778 556 778 556 247 0 342 493 556 730 651 556 651 556]966 967 722 968[500 722 784 651]972 973 556 974[667 614 611 778 497 879 222 278 667 500 222 492 846 722 556 778 868 667 730 556]994 995 667 996[500 600 333 278 611 278 611 761 722 717 500 611 500]1009 1010 611 1011 1012 500 1013[556 510 438 500 556 260 413 584 278 1333 1222]1024 1025 1056 1026[778 444 1222 944 778 556 667 556 0 667 556]1038[889 778 556 778 556 667 500 778 556 778 556 611 500 222 1333 1222 1056 778 556 1034 618 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556]1069 1072 278 1073[778 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 722 556 722 556 667 500 611 278 545 437 722 556 669]1094 1095 604 1096[611 500 667 556 667 556 778 556 0 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 500]1113 1116 556 1117 1118 500 1119 1121 556 1122[704 439 465 616 509 278]1128 1129 556 1130[550 501 617]1133 1135 556 1136 1137 222 1138[356]1139 1141 222 1142[563]1143 1145 833 1146 1147 556 1148[583 556 766 779 556]1153 1159 333 1160 1161 534 1162[500 291 305 290 348]1167 1168 278 1169[556 563 550 500 722 500 515 500 547]1178 1183 500 1184[778 512 509]1187 1188 550 1189[293 500 448 556]1193 1194 500 1195[927 905 972 671 461 708 751 642 593 485 527]1206 1207 308 1208[122]1209 1211 219 1212[327 510 348 191 355]1217 1219 222 1220 1221 333 1222 1223 356 1224 1227 584 1228 1234 333 1235 1236 278 1237 1244 333 1245[365 93 325 336 356]1250 1254 383 1255 1259 333 1260 1268 542 1269[383]1270 1274 542 1275[383]1276 1280 542 1281[383]1282 1286 542 1287[383]1288 1292 542 1293[383]1294 1302 542 1303[383]1304 1308 542 1309[383]1310 1314 542 1315[383]1316 1320 542 1321[383]1322 1326 542 1327[383]1328 1336 542 1337[383]1338 1342 542 1343[383]1344 1348 542 1349[383]1350 1354 542 1355[383]1356 1360 542 1361[383]1362 1370 542 1371[383]1372 1376 542 1377[383]1378 1382 542 1383[383]1384 1388 542 1389[383]1390 1394 542 1395[383]1396 1399 542 1400 1490 0 1491 1493 333 1494[505 550 716 882 716 556 779 563 778 556 722 500 611 378 625 529 756 577 846 833 673 556 673 512]1518 1519 667 1520[609 596 746 554 415 358 563 579 500 222 778]1531 1532 441 1533[667 715]1535 1536 556 1537[1302 595 760 779 903 694 668 500 878 681 829 685 1024 856 614 465 831 728 778 556 760 590 760 590 1108 918 828 600 1282 876 0 1302 595 722 500 556]1573 1578 0 1579[715 556 651 526 667 556 645 525 614 465 589 472 743 567 891 701 1087 839 722 500 722 500 611 833 897 572 673 518 850 635 850 635 278 917 688 627 520 686 564 722 550 722 550 673 518 833 686 333 667 556 667 556]1632[889 667 556 778 556 917 688 614 465 614 500 715 556 715 556 778 556 778 556 694 492 639 500 639 500 639 500 673 518 886 736 667 556 952 833 937 764 614 465 980 846 1013 831 778 550 732 1114]1679 1716 0 1717[667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 722 500 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 611 278 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 278 222]1763 1764 278 1765[667 500 667 500 667 500 556 222 556 222 556 222 556 222]1779 1784 833 1785[722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 556 667 556 722 333 722 333 722 333 722 333 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 278 611 278 611 278 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 500 667 500 944 722 944 722 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 500 611 500 611 500 556 278 722 500 556 222]1867 1874 570 1875 1876 667 1877 1882 813 1883 1888 439 1889 1890 765 1891 1894 960 1895 1902 555 1903 1904 820 1905 1910 1015 1911 1918 222 1919 1920 375 1921 1926 571 1927 1932 556 1933 1934 827 1935 1936 1022 1937 1938 973 1939 1946 550 1947[813 960 1009 960]1951 1958 779 1959 1960 810 1961 1962 1005 1963 1966 956 1967 1968 570 1969 1970 439 1971 1972 555 1973 1974 222 1975 1976 556 1977 1978 550 1979 1980 779 1981 1988 570 1989 1990 667 1991 1996 813 1997 2004 555 2005 2006 820 2007 2012 1015 2013 2020 779 2021 2022 810 2023 2024 1005 2025 2028 956 2029 2035 570 2036 2040 667 2041 2045 333 2046 2050 555 2051 2052 813 2053 2054 869 2055[722]2056 2058 333 2059 2064 222 2065 2066 278 2067 2068 424 2069 2071 333 2072 2075 550 2076 2077 573 2078 2079 550 2080 2081 667 2082[813 862 765]2085 2087 333 2088 2092 779 2093[924 827 907 810 761]2098 2099 333 2100[556]2101 2102 722 2103[833 722 1130 944 667 611]2110[500 594]2112 2115 0 2116 2117 222 2118[521 667 628 294 629 348]2124 2125 667 2126 2134 333 2135[278]2136 2139 333 2140 2141 397 2142[333]2143 2153 0 2154[667 556 500 717 889]2159 2160 500 2161 2162 555 2163[471 465 222 414 500 448 686 586 556 500 556 500 611 944 457]2178 2179 556 2180[535]2181 2182 534 2183[514 550 556 698 556 500 722 500]2191 2192 465 2193[607 378 500 550 535 728 564 491 717]2202 2203 454 2204[477]2205 2206 452 2207[490 476 161 334 450 376 554 473 474 497 382 438 457 396 444 641]2223 2224 358 2225[354 592 312 396]2229 2230 387 2231 2232 289 2233[392 125 315 500 307 395 355]2240 2241 395 2242[367 195 354 467 526 357 441 398 367 381 438 381 125 191 354 357 398 367 379 438 381 709 655 749 607 609 745 656 789 584]2272 2274 0 2275[556 333 354 500]2280[500]2282[333 250 167 556 278 200 83 0 737 722 833 686 913 883 881 667 722 500 556 611]2302 2303 500 2304[581]2305 2309 0 2310[573]2311 2313 722 2314[544 500]2316 2318 0 2319[353 0]2321 2322 556 2323[278 833]2325 2326 556 2327 2328 333 2329[500 278 500 556 380 557 762]2336 2337 222 2338[556 550 563]2341 2342 556 2343[278 688 500 222 833]2348 2349 556 2350[333 500 387]2353 2355 500 2356 2359 556 2360[439 465 635 222 500 291 556 545 379]2369 2370 356 2371[395 289]2373 2374 206 2375[392 354]2377 2380 125 2381[235]2382 2383 125 2384[303]2385 2386 500 2387 2388 307 2389[353]2390 2391 395 2392[344 191 195 307 402]2397 2398 307 2399[357]2400 2401 328 2402[367 342 395]2405 2408 0 2409[278 358 387 395 381 387 778]2416 2417 667 2418[722 333]2420 2427 570 2428 2435 222 2436 2443 550 2444 2447 222 2448 2451 550 2452[453 667 722]2455 2456 667 2457[556 500 222 755 556 722 333 667]2465 2468 500 2469[222 544 378 667 500 667 500 614 439 686 583]2480 2488 0 2489[943 490 500 556 222 556 667 722 556 278 722 556 667 500 611]2504 2505 500 2506[602 439 652]2509 2514 0 2515[222 723 722 723]2519 2529 0 2530[778 556 944 722 673 0 755 602 1037 841 278 438]2542 2543 191 2544 2545 500 2546 2548 278 2549[333 611]2551 2552 556 2553[384 539 534 556 539 556 519 556 559 556 387]2564 2567 556 2568[562 523 556 560 721 756 746 1167 746 376 657 778 556 222 496 255 556 289]2586 2588 556 2589[376 255 222 555 567 595 613 554 504 648 617 239 431 567 467 722 615 649 553 649 607 553 508 608 551 793 554 553 507 821 833 467 649 554 613 595]2625 2630 555 2631[595]2632 2635 554 2636 2639 239 2640[615]2641 2645 649 2646 2649 608 2650[553]2651 2653 555 2654 2657 595 2658 2659 613 2660 2664 554 2665 2668 648 2669[617 618]2671 2675 239 2676[658 431 567]2679 2682 467 2683 2685 615 2686[620]2687 2689 649 2690 2692 607 2693 2697 553 2698 2700 508 2701[507]2702 2707 608 2708 2711 793 2712 2714 553 2715 2717 507 2718[555 821 649 555 567 460 555 554 507 617 649 239 567 544 722 615 523 649 612 553 518 508 553 659 554 658 649 555 554 617 239 649 553 649 239 553 554 710 460 597 553]2759 2760 239 2761[431 869 839 731 511 548 612 555 565 567 460 551 554 791 515]2776 2777 612 2778[511 566 722 617 649 612 553 595 508 548 631 554 607 561 770 765 676 738 542 597 835 607 392]2801 2813 333 2814 2824 721 2825 2835 756 2836 2848 746 2849 2857 376 2858[481]2859 2861 376 2862 2863 255 2864[292 331 255]2867 2874 376 2875[657]2876 2884 556 2885[222 496]2887 2888 255 2889[301 331 255]2892 2893 289 2894[375 289]2896 2899 556 2900[578]2901 2904 333 2905[602 468 611 458 715 602 667]2912 2913 556 2914[667 966 754 829 717 951 893 667 500 1068 847 1100 831 725 550 673 556]2931 2932 278 2933[557 766 398 612 562 696 561 833 667 755 676 333 556 490 122 357 667 611 278 556 0 399 508 602 643]2958 2959 0 2960[752 722 716 705 723 726 635 722 807 716 660 528 917 758 699 598]2976 2977 706 2978[713 752 716 708 693 722 699 802 746 762 722 688 660 676 677 516 762 686 778 788 274 222 184 200 265 231 514 837 559 580 579 561 580 516 556 697 591 556 233 839 563]3019 3020 556 3021[523 557 548 556 228 555 482 551 352 837 522 575 556 555 837 556 551 391 837 572 557 744 719 278 324]3046 3047 1001 3048[727]3049 3052 1111 3053[1333 556 500 722 550 1284 1017 729 556 686 564 813 737 530 744 747 539 765 808 278 209 278 209 722 556 830 627]3080 3081 552 3082 3083 516 3084 3085 586 3086[504 553 1155 902 1167 922 1020 886 942 734 942 734 942 734 722 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 651 310 556 222 802 611 878 651 1333 952 667 556 824 698 931 805 778 556 979 748 581 410]3130 3131 582 3132[667 500 944 722 549 494 667 556 667 556 509 408]3144 3145 445 3146 3147 501 3148 3149 561 3150[327 677 345 961 680 333 750 672 476 778 556 405 333]3163 3165 590 3166[556 222 800 599 405 333 644 500 722 444 767 601 722]3179 3180 500 3181[556 789 678 611 278 669 525 714 549 669 525 778 556 667 500 722 556 722 333 667 500 787 614 755 684 667 611 524 735 667 571 1003 779 770 448 639 833 611 667 833 278 1185 570 896 478 556 667 278 556 368 347 242 851]3234 3235 556 3236 3237 548 3238[611]3239 3241 944 3242 3243 952 3244[549 607 333 503 450 627 474 700 291]3253 3254 556 3255 3256 833 3257[613 546 613 594 604 500 604]3264 3265 500 3266[333 383 273 248 415 721 764 944 921 556 649 667 611]]>>
<</Ascent 998/CIDSet 444 0 R/CapHeight 716/Descent -325/Flags 68/FontBBox[-517 -325 1359 998]/FontFamily(Arial)/FontFile2 445 0 R/FontName/WEHNYB+Arial,Italic/FontStretch/Normal/FontWeight 400/ItalicAngle -12/StemV 92/Type/FontDescriptor/XHeight 519>>
<</BaseFont/MPKXXV+Arial,Italic/CIDSystemInfo 450 0 R/CIDToGIDMap/Identity/DW 1000/FontDescriptor 451 0 R/Subtype/CIDFontType2/Type/Font/W[0[750 0]2 4 278 5[355]6 7 556 8[889 667 191]11 12 333 13[389 584 278 333]17 18 278 19 28 556 29 30 278 31 33 584 34[556 1015]36 37 667 38 39 722 40[667 611 778 722 278 500 667 556 833 722 778 667 778 722 667 611 722 667 944]59 60 667 61[611]62 64 278 65[469 556 333]68 69 556 70[500]71 72 556 73[278]74 75 556 76 77 222 78[500 222 833]81 84 556 85[333 500 278 556 500 722]91 93 500 94[334 260 334 584]98 99 667 100[722 667 722 778 722]105 110 556 111[500]112 115 556 116 119 278 120 130 556 131[400]132 134 556 135[350 537 611]138 139 737 141 142 333 143[549]145[778 713]147 149 549 150[556 576 494 713 823 549 274 370 365 768 889]161 162 611 163[333 584 549 556 549 612]169 170 556 172 173 667 174[778]176[944 556]179 180 333 181 182 222 183[549 494 500 667 167 556]189 190 333 191 192 500 193[556 278 222 333]198 202 667 203 206 278 207 209 778 210 212 722 213[278]214 223 333 224[556 222 667 500 611 500 260 722 556 667 500 667 556]237 238 584 239 241 333 242 244 834 245[556 778 556 278 667 500 722 500 722 500 556 552 333 667 556 667 556 722 625 722 667 556 667]268 269 556 270[222 556 281 556 400 722 556 722 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 667 500 611 278 611 354 722 556 722 556 611 500 611 500 570 778 837 570 556 439 603 374 652 552 500 365 1094]313[500]315[500]317 318 500 319[979 719 584 604 584]324 325 604 326[708 625]328 372 708 373[729 604]376 379 990 380 382 604 383[1021 1052 917]386 387 750 388[531 656 594 510 500 750 733 444 615 188 354 885 323 604]402 403 354 404[604 354 667 556 722 500 722 500 667 556 667 556 667 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 722 556 722 556 278 222 278 222 278 222 278 222 500 222 667]439 440 500 441[556 222 722 556 723 556 778 556 778 556 722 333 667 500 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 944 722 667 500 222 667 556]473[889 778 611 278 944 722 944 722 944 722 667 500 222 333 556 600]489 492 834 493 496 333 497[667 789 846 389 794 865 775 222]505 506 667 507[671 667 611 722 278]512 513 667 514[833 722 648 778 725 667 600 611]522 523 667 524[831 761 278 667 570 439 555 222 550 571 500 463 555 542 222 500 492 548 500 447 556 573 486 550 546 728 779 222 550 556 550 779 667 843 544 708 667]561 562 278 563[500 1066 982 844 589 639 724 667 651 667 544 704 667 917 614]578 579 715 580[589 686 833 722 778 725 667 722 611 639 795 667 727 673 920 923 805 886 651 694 1022 682 556 563 522 493 553 556 688 465]610 611 556 612[472 564 686 550 556 550 556 500 833 500 835 500 572 518 830 851 621 736 526 492 752 534]634 635 556 636[378 496 500]639 641 222 642[910 828 556 472 500 556 492 339]651[1083 670]653 665 0 666[383 0 275]669 670 0 671[278 563 542 399 508 602 247 382 599 590 247 509 461 463 599 601 247 353 574 529 566 546 461 479 550 509 694 643]699 701 493 702[236 417 815 247]706 707 509 708 709 463 710[535]711 714 694 715 717 563 718[542 399 508 602 287 411 590 287 509 461 463 601 353 574 566 546 479 550 509 694 643 247 542 461 546 576]744 763 0 764[556]766[812 604 793 634]770 785 0 786[513]787 788 834 789 822 0 823[222 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 278 222 278 222 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 812 604 812 604 812 604 812 604 812 604 722 556 722 556 793 634 793 634 793 634 793 634 793 634 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 556 278 222 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556]928 931 0 932[544 378 917 688 589 472 589 472 722 550 556 500 556 500 667 500 673 518 673 556 778 556 778 556 247 0 342 493 556 730 651 556 651 556]966 967 722 968[500 722 784 651]972 973 556 974[667 614 611 778 497 879 222 278 667 500 222 492 846 722 556 778 868 667 730 556]994 995 667 996[500 600 333 278 611 278 611 761 722 717 500 611 500]1009 1010 611 1011 1012 500 1013[556 510 438 500 556 260 413 584 278 1333 1222]1024 1025 1056 1026[778 444 1222 944 778 556 667 556 0 667 556]1038[889 778 556 778 556 667 500 778 556 778 556 611 500 222 1333 1222 1056 778 556 1034 618 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556]1069 1072 278 1073[778 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 722 556 722 556 667 500 611 278 545 437 722 556 669]1094 1095 604 1096[611 500 667 556 667 556 778 556 0 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 500]1113 1116 556 1117 1118 500 1119 1121 556 1122[704 439 465 616 509 278]1128 1129 556 1130[550 501 617]1133 1135 556 1136 1137 222 1138[356]1139 1141 222 1142[563]1143 1145 833 1146 1147 556 1148[583 556 766 779 556]1153 1159 333 1160 1161 534 1162[500 291 305 290 348]1167 1168 278 1169[556 563 550 500 722 500 515 500 547]1178 1183 500 1184[778 512 509]1187 1188 550 1189[293 500 448 556]1193 1194 500 1195[927 905 972 671 461 708 751 642 593 485 527]1206 1207 308 1208[122]1209 1211 219 1212[327 510 348 191 355]1217 1219 222 1220 1221 333 1222 1223 356 1224 1227 584 1228 1234 333 1235 1236 278 1237 1244 333 1245[365 93 325 336 356]1250 1254 383 1255 1259 333 1260 1268 542 1269[383]1270 1274 542 1275[383]1276 1280 542 1281[383]1282 1286 542 1287[383]1288 1292 542 1293[383]1294 1302 542 1303[383]1304 1308 542 1309[383]1310 1314 542 1315[383]1316 1320 542 1321[383]1322 1326 542 1327[383]1328 1336 542 1337[383]1338 1342 542 1343[383]1344 1348 542 1349[383]1350 1354 542 1355[383]1356 1360 542 1361[383]1362 1370 542 1371[383]1372 1376 542 1377[383]1378 1382 542 1383[383]1384 1388 542 1389[383]1390 1394 542 1395[383]1396 1399 542 1400 1490 0 1491 1493 333 1494[505 550 716 882 716 556 779 563 778 556 722 500 611 378 625 529 756 577 846 833 673 556 673 512]1518 1519 667 1520[609 596 746 554 415 358 563 579 500 222 778]1531 1532 441 1533[667 715]1535 1536 556 1537[1302 595 760 779 903 694 668 500 878 681 829 685 1024 856 614 465 831 728 778 556 760 590 760 590 1108 918 828 600 1282 876 0 1302 595 722 500 556]1573 1578 0 1579[715 556 651 526 667 556 645 525 614 465 589 472 743 567 891 701 1087 839 722 500 722 500 611 833 897 572 673 518 850 635 850 635 278 917 688 627 520 686 564 722 550 722 550 673 518 833 686 333 667 556 667 556]1632[889 667 556 778 556 917 688 614 465 614 500 715 556 715 556 778 556 778 556 694 492 639 500 639 500 639 500 673 518 886 736 667 556 952 833 937 764 614 465 980 846 1013 831 778 550 732 1114]1679 1716 0 1717[667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 722 500 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 611 278 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 278 222]1763 1764 278 1765[667 500 667 500 667 500 556 222 556 222 556 222 556 222]1779 1784 833 1785[722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 556 667 556 722 333 722 333 722 333 722 333 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 278 611 278 611 278 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 500 667 500 944 722 944 722 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 500 611 500 611 500 556 278 722 500 556 222]1867 1874 570 1875 1876 667 1877 1882 813 1883 1888 439 1889 1890 765 1891 1894 960 1895 1902 555 1903 1904 820 1905 1910 1015 1911 1918 222 1919 1920 375 1921 1926 571 1927 1932 556 1933 1934 827 1935 1936 1022 1937 1938 973 1939 1946 550 1947[813 960 1009 960]1951 1958 779 1959 1960 810 1961 1962 1005 1963 1966 956 1967 1968 570 1969 1970 439 1971 1972 555 1973 1974 222 1975 1976 556 1977 1978 550 1979 1980 779 1981 1988 570 1989 1990 667 1991 1996 813 1997 2004 555 2005 2006 820 2007 2012 1015 2013 2020 779 2021 2022 810 2023 2024 1005 2025 2028 956 2029 2035 570 2036 2040 667 2041 2045 333 2046 2050 555 2051 2052 813 2053 2054 869 2055[722]2056 2058 333 2059 2064 222 2065 2066 278 2067 2068 424 2069 2071 333 2072 2075 550 2076 2077 573 2078 2079 550 2080 2081 667 2082[813 862 765]2085 2087 333 2088 2092 779 2093[924 827 907 810 761]2098 2099 333 2100[556]2101 2102 722 2103[833 722 1130 944 667 611]2110[500 594]2112 2115 0 2116 2117 222 2118[521 667 628 294 629 348]2124 2125 667 2126 2134 333 2135[278]2136 2139 333 2140 2141 397 2142[333]2143 2153 0 2154[667 556 500 717 889]2159 2160 500 2161 2162 555 2163[471 465 222 414 500 448 686 586 556 500 556 500 611 944 457]2178 2179 556 2180[535]2181 2182 534 2183[514 550 556 698 556 500 722 500]2191 2192 465 2193[607 378 500 550 535 728 564 491 717]2202 2203 454 2204[477]2205 2206 452 2207[490 476 161 334 450 376 554 473 474 497 382 438 457 396 444 641]2223 2224 358 2225[354 592 312 396]2229 2230 387 2231 2232 289 2233[392 125 315 500 307 395 355]2240 2241 395 2242[367 195 354 467 526 357 441 398 367 381 438 381 125 191 354 357 398 367 379 438 381 709 655 749 607 609 745 656 789 584]2272 2274 0 2275[556 333 354 500]2280[500]2282[333 250 167 556 278 200 83 0 737 722 833 686 913 883 881 667 722 500 556 611]2302 2303 500 2304[581]2305 2309 0 2310[573]2311 2313 722 2314[544 500]2316 2318 0 2319[353 0]2321 2322 556 2323[278 833]2325 2326 556 2327 2328 333 2329[500 278 500 556 380 557 762]2336 2337 222 2338[556 550 563]2341 2342 556 2343[278 688 500 222 833]2348 2349 556 2350[333 500 387]2353 2355 500 2356 2359 556 2360[439 465 635 222 500 291 556 545 379]2369 2370 356 2371[395 289]2373 2374 206 2375[392 354]2377 2380 125 2381[235]2382 2383 125 2384[303]2385 2386 500 2387 2388 307 2389[353]2390 2391 395 2392[344 191 195 307 402]2397 2398 307 2399[357]2400 2401 328 2402[367 342 395]2405 2408 0 2409[278 358 387 395 381 387 778]2416 2417 667 2418[722 333]2420 2427 570 2428 2435 222 2436 2443 550 2444 2447 222 2448 2451 550 2452[453 667 722]2455 2456 667 2457[556 500 222 755 556 722 333 667]2465 2468 500 2469[222 544 378 667 500 667 500 614 439 686 583]2480 2488 0 2489[943 490 500 556 222 556 667 722 556 278 722 556 667 500 611]2504 2505 500 2506[602 439 652]2509 2514 0 2515[222 723 722 723]2519 2529 0 2530[778 556 944 722 673 0 755 602 1037 841 278 438]2542 2543 191 2544 2545 500 2546 2548 278 2549[333 611]2551 2552 556 2553[384 539 534 556 539 556 519 556 559 556 387]2564 2567 556 2568[562 523 556 560 721 756 746 1167 746 376 657 778 556 222 496 255 556 289]2586 2588 556 2589[376 255 222 555 567 595 613 554 504 648 617 239 431 567 467 722 615 649 553 649 607 553 508 608 551 793 554 553 507 821 833 467 649 554 613 595]2625 2630 555 2631[595]2632 2635 554 2636 2639 239 2640[615]2641 2645 649 2646 2649 608 2650[553]2651 2653 555 2654 2657 595 2658 2659 613 2660 2664 554 2665 2668 648 2669[617 618]2671 2675 239 2676[658 431 567]2679 2682 467 2683 2685 615 2686[620]2687 2689 649 2690 2692 607 2693 2697 553 2698 2700 508 2701[507]2702 2707 608 2708 2711 793 2712 2714 553 2715 2717 507 2718[555 821 649 555 567 460 555 554 507 617 649 239 567 544 722 615 523 649 612 553 518 508 553 659 554 658 649 555 554 617 239 649 553 649 239 553 554 710 460 597 553]2759 2760 239 2761[431 869 839 731 511 548 612 555 565 567 460 551 554 791 515]2776 2777 612 2778[511 566 722 617 649 612 553 595 508 548 631 554 607 561 770 765 676 738 542 597 835 607 392]2801 2813 333 2814 2824 721 2825 2835 756 2836 2848 746 2849 2857 376 2858[481]2859 2861 376 2862 2863 255 2864[292 331 255]2867 2874 376 2875[657]2876 2884 556 2885[222 496]2887 2888 255 2889[301 331 255]2892 2893 289 2894[375 289]2896 2899 556 2900[578]2901 2904 333 2905[602 468 611 458 715 602 667]2912 2913 556 2914[667 966 754 829 717 951 893 667 500 1068 847 1100 831 725 550 673 556]2931 2932 278 2933[557 766 398 612 562 696 561 833 667 755 676 333 556 490 122 357 667 611 278 556 0 399 508 602 643]2958 2959 0 2960[752 722 716 705 723 726 635 722 807 716 660 528 917 758 699 598]2976 2977 706 2978[713 752 716 708 693 722 699 802 746 762 722 688 660 676 677 516 762 686 778 788 274 222 184 200 265 231 514 837 559 580 579 561 580 516 556 697 591 556 233 839 563]3019 3020 556 3021[523 557 548 556 228 555 482 551 352 837 522 575 556 555 837 556 551 391 837 572 557 744 719 278 324]3046 3047 1001 3048[727]3049 3052 1111 3053[1333 556 500 722 550 1284 1017 729 556 686 564 813 737 530 744 747 539 765 808 278 209 278 209 722 556 830 627]3080 3081 552 3082 3083 516 3084 3085 586 3086[504 553 1155 902 1167 922 1020 886 942 734 942 734 942 734 722 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 651 310 556 222 802 611 878 651 1333 952 667 556 824 698 931 805 778 556 979 748 581 410]3130 3131 582 3132[667 500 944 722 549 494 667 556 667 556 509 408]3144 3145 445 3146 3147 501 3148 3149 561 3150[327 677 345 961 680 333 750 672 476 778 556 405 333]3163 3165 590 3166[556 222 800 599 405 333 644 500 722 444 767 601 722]3179 3180 500 3181[556 789 678 611 278 669 525 714 549 669 525 778 556 667 500 722 556 722 333 667 500 787 614 755 684 667 611 524 735 667 571 1003 779 770 448 639 833 611 667 833 278 1185 570 896 478 556 667 278 556 368 347 242 851]3234 3235 556 3236 3237 548 3238[611]3239 3241 944 3242 3243 952 3244[549 607 333 503 450 627 474 700 291]3253 3254 556 3255 3256 833 3257[613 546 613 594 604 500 604]3264 3265 500 3266[333 383 273 248 415 721 764 944 921 556 649 667 611]]>>
<</Ascent 998/CIDSet 452 0 R/CapHeight 716/Descent -325/Flags 68/FontBBox[-517 -325 1359 998]/FontFamily(Arial)/FontFile2 453 0 R/FontName/MPKXXV+Arial,Italic/FontStretch/Normal/FontWeight 400/ItalicAngle -12/StemV 92/Type/FontDescriptor/XHeight 519>>
<</BaseFont/CCNSQU+Arial,Italic/CIDSystemInfo 458 0 R/CIDToGIDMap/Identity/DW 1000/FontDescriptor 459 0 R/Subtype/CIDFontType2/Type/Font/W[0[750 0]2 4 278 5[355]6 7 556 8[889 667 191]11 12 333 13[389 584 278 333]17 18 278 19 28 556 29 30 278 31 33 584 34[556 1015]36 37 667 38 39 722 40[667 611 778 722 278 500 667 556 833 722 778 667 778 722 667 611 722 667 944]59 60 667 61[611]62 64 278 65[469 556 333]68 69 556 70[500]71 72 556 73[278]74 75 556 76 77 222 78[500 222 833]81 84 556 85[333 500 278 556 500 722]91 93 500 94[334 260 334 584]98 99 667 100[722 667 722 778 722]105 110 556 111[500]112 115 556 116 119 278 120 130 556 131[400]132 134 556 135[350 537 611]138 139 737 141 142 333 143[549]145[778 713]147 149 549 150[556 576 494 713 823 549 274 370 365 768 889]161 162 611 163[333 584 549 556 549 612]169 170 556 172 173 667 174[778]176[944 556]179 180 333 181 182 222 183[549 494 500 667 167 556]189 190 333 191 192 500 193[556 278 222 333]198 202 667 203 206 278 207 209 778 210 212 722 213[278]214 223 333 224[556 222 667 500 611 500 260 722 556 667 500 667 556]237 238 584 239 241 333 242 244 834 245[556 778 556 278 667 500 722 500 722 500 556 552 333 667 556 667 556 722 625 722 667 556 667]268 269 556 270[222 556 281 556 400 722 556 722 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 667 500 611 278 611 354 722 556 722 556 611 500 611 500 570 778 837 570 556 439 603 374 652 552 500 365 1094]313[500]315[500]317 318 500 319[979 719 584 604 584]324 325 604 326[708 625]328 372 708 373[729 604]376 379 990 380 382 604 383[1021 1052 917]386 387 750 388[531 656 594 510 500 750 733 444 615 188 354 885 323 604]402 403 354 404[604 354 667 556 722 500 722 500 667 556 667 556 667 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 722 556 722 556 278 222 278 222 278 222 278 222 500 222 667]439 440 500 441[556 222 722 556 723 556 778 556 778 556 722 333 667 500 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 944 722 667 500 222 667 556]473[889 778 611 278 944 722 944 722 944 722 667 500 222 333 556 600]489 492 834 493 496 333 497[667 789 846 389 794 865 775 222]505 506 667 507[671 667 611 722 278]512 513 667 514[833 722 648 778 725 667 600 611]522 523 667 524[831 761 278 667 570 439 555 222 550 571 500 463 555 542 222 500 492 548 500 447 556 573 486 550 546 728 779 222 550 556 550 779 667 843 544 708 667]561 562 278 563[500 1066 982 844 589 639 724 667 651 667 544 704 667 917 614]578 579 715 580[589 686 833 722 778 725 667 722 611 639 795 667 727 673 920 923 805 886 651 694 1022 682 556 563 522 493 553 556 688 465]610 611 556 612[472 564 686 550 556 550 556 500 833 500 835 500 572 518 830 851 621 736 526 492 752 534]634 635 556 636[378 496 500]639 641 222 642[910 828 556 472 500 556 492 339]651[1083 670]653 665 0 666[383 0 275]669 670 0 671[278 563 542 399 508 602 247 382 599 590 247 509 461 463 599 601 247 353 574 529 566 546 461 479 550 509 694 643]699 701 493 702[236 417 815 247]706 707 509 708 709 463 710[535]711 714 694 715 717 563 718[542 399 508 602 287 411 590 287 509 461 463 601 353 574 566 546 479 550 509 694 643 247 542 461 546 576]744 763 0 764[556]766[812 604 793 634]770 785 0 786[513]787 788 834 789 822 0 823[222 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 278 222 278 222 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 812 604 812 604 812 604 812 604 812 604 722 556 722 556 793 634 793 634 793 634 793 634 793 634 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 556 278 222 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556]928 931 0 932[544 378 917 688 589 472 589 472 722 550 556 500 556 500 667 500 673 518 673 556 778 556 778 556 247 0 342 493 556 730 651 556 651 556]966 967 722 968[500 722 784 651]972 973 556 974[667 614 611 778 497 879 222 278 667 500 222 492 846 722 556 778 868 667 730 556]994 995 667 996[500 600 333 278 611 278 611 761 722 717 500 611 500]1009 1010 611 1011 1012 500 1013[556 510 438 500 556 260 413 584 278 1333 1222]1024 1025 1056 1026[778 444 1222 944 778 556 667 556 0 667 556]1038[889 778 556 778 556 667 500 778 556 778 556 611 500 222 1333 1222 1056 778 556 1034 618 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556]1069 1072 278 1073[778 556 778 556 722 333 722 333 722 556 722 556 667 500 611 278 545 437 722 556 669]1094 1095 604 1096[611 500 667 556 667 556 778 556 0 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 500]1113 1116 556 1117 1118 500 1119 1121 556 1122[704 439 465 616 509 278]1128 1129 556 1130[550 501 617]1133 1135 556 1136 1137 222 1138[356]1139 1141 222 1142[563]1143 1145 833 1146 1147 556 1148[583 556 766 779 556]1153 1159 333 1160 1161 534 1162[500 291 305 290 348]1167 1168 278 1169[556 563 550 500 722 500 515 500 547]1178 1183 500 1184[778 512 509]1187 1188 550 1189[293 500 448 556]1193 1194 500 1195[927 905 972 671 461 708 751 642 593 485 527]1206 1207 308 1208[122]1209 1211 219 1212[327 510 348 191 355]1217 1219 222 1220 1221 333 1222 1223 356 1224 1227 584 1228 1234 333 1235 1236 278 1237 1244 333 1245[365 93 325 336 356]1250 1254 383 1255 1259 333 1260 1268 542 1269[383]1270 1274 542 1275[383]1276 1280 542 1281[383]1282 1286 542 1287[383]1288 1292 542 1293[383]1294 1302 542 1303[383]1304 1308 542 1309[383]1310 1314 542 1315[383]1316 1320 542 1321[383]1322 1326 542 1327[383]1328 1336 542 1337[383]1338 1342 542 1343[383]1344 1348 542 1349[383]1350 1354 542 1355[383]1356 1360 542 1361[383]1362 1370 542 1371[383]1372 1376 542 1377[383]1378 1382 542 1383[383]1384 1388 542 1389[383]1390 1394 542 1395[383]1396 1399 542 1400 1490 0 1491 1493 333 1494[505 550 716 882 716 556 779 563 778 556 722 500 611 378 625 529 756 577 846 833 673 556 673 512]1518 1519 667 1520[609 596 746 554 415 358 563 579 500 222 778]1531 1532 441 1533[667 715]1535 1536 556 1537[1302 595 760 779 903 694 668 500 878 681 829 685 1024 856 614 465 831 728 778 556 760 590 760 590 1108 918 828 600 1282 876 0 1302 595 722 500 556]1573 1578 0 1579[715 556 651 526 667 556 645 525 614 465 589 472 743 567 891 701 1087 839 722 500 722 500 611 833 897 572 673 518 850 635 850 635 278 917 688 627 520 686 564 722 550 722 550 673 518 833 686 333 667 556 667 556]1632[889 667 556 778 556 917 688 614 465 614 500 715 556 715 556 778 556 778 556 694 492 639 500 639 500 639 500 673 518 886 736 667 556 952 833 937 764 614 465 980 846 1013 831 778 550 732 1114]1679 1716 0 1717[667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 722 500 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 667 556 611 278 778 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 278 222]1763 1764 278 1765[667 500 667 500 667 500 556 222 556 222 556 222 556 222]1779 1784 833 1785[722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 778 556 667 556 667 556 722 333 722 333 722 333 722 333 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 278 611 278 611 278 611 278 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 722 556 667 500 667 500 944 722 944 722 667 500 667 500 667 500 611 500 611 500 611 500 556 278 722 500 556 222]1867 1874 570 1875 1876 667 1877 1882 813 1883 1888 439 1889 1890 765 1891 1894 960 1895 1902 555 1903 1904 820 1905 1910 1015 1911 1918 222 1919 1920 375 1921 1926 571 1927 1932 556 1933 1934 827 1935 1936 1022 1937 1938 973 1939 1946 550 1947[813 960 1009 960]1951 1958 779 1959 1960 810 1961 1962 1005 1963 1966 956 1967 1968 570 1969 1970 439 1971 1972 555 1973 1974 222 1975 1976 556 1977 1978 550 1979 1980 779 1981 1988 570 1989 1990 667 1991 1996 813 1997 2004 555 2005 2006 820 2007 2012 1015 2013 2020 779 2021 2022 810 2023 2024 1005 2025 2028 956 2029 2035 570 2036 2040 667 2041 2045 333 2046 2050 555 2051 2052 813 2053 2054 869 2055[722]2056 2058 333 2059 2064 222 2065 2066 278 2067 2068 424 2069 2071 333 2072 2075 550 2076 2077 573 2078 2079 550 2080 2081 667 2082[813 862 765]2085 2087 333 2088 2092 779 2093[924 827 907 810 761]2098 2099 333 2100[556]2101 2102 722 2103[833 722 1130 944 667 611]2110[500 594]2112 2115 0 2116 2117 222 2118[521 667 628 294 629 348]2124 2125 667 2126 2134 333 2135[278]2136 2139 333 2140 2141 397 2142[333]2143 2153 0 2154[667 556 500 717 889]2159 2160 500 2161 2162 555 2163[471 465 222 414 500 448 686 586 556 500 556 500 611 944 457]2178 2179 556 2180[535]2181 2182 534 2183[514 550 556 698 556 500 722 500]2191 2192 465 2193[607 378 500 550 535 728 564 491 717]2202 2203 454 2204[477]2205 2206 452 2207[490 476 161 334 450 376 554 473 474 497 382 438 457 396 444 641]2223 2224 358 2225[354 592 312 396]2229 2230 387 2231 2232 289 2233[392 125 315 500 307 395 355]2240 2241 395 2242[367 195 354 467 526 357 441 398 367 381 438 381 125 191 354 357 398 367 379 438 381 709 655 749 607 609 745 656 789 584]2272 2274 0 2275[556 333 354 500]2280[500]2282[333 250 167 556 278 200 83 0 737 722 833 686 913 883 881 667 722 500 556 611]2302 2303 500 2304[581]2305 2309 0 2310[573]2311 2313 722 2314[544 500]2316 2318 0 2319[353 0]2321 2322 556 2323[278 833]2325 2326 556 2327 2328 333 2329[500 278 500 556 380 557 762]2336 2337 222 2338[556 550 563]2341 2342 556 2343[278 688 500 222 833]2348 2349 556 2350[333 500 387]2353 2355 500 2356 2359 556 2360[439 465 635 222 500 291 556 545 379]2369 2370 356 2371[395 289]2373 2374 206 2375[392 354]2377 2380 125 2381[235]2382 2383 125 2384[303]2385 2386 500 2387 2388 307 2389[353]2390 2391 395 2392[344 191 195 307 402]2397 2398 307 2399[357]2400 2401 328 2402[367 342 395]2405 2408 0 2409[278 358 387 395 381 387 778]2416 2417 667 2418[722 333]2420 2427 570 2428 2435 222 2436 2443 550 2444 2447 222 2448 2451 550 2452[453 667 722]2455 2456 667 2457[556 500 222 755 556 722 333 667]2465 2468 500 2469[222 544 378 667 500 667 500 614 439 686 583]2480 2488 0 2489[943 490 500 556 222 556 667 722 556 278 722 556 667 500 611]2504 2505 500 2506[602 439 652]2509 2514 0 2515[222 723 722 723]2519 2529 0 2530[778 556 944 722 673 0 755 602 1037 841 278 438]2542 2543 191 2544 2545 500 2546 2548 278 2549[333 611]2551 2552 556 2553[384 539 534 556 539 556 519 556 559 556 387]2564 2567 556 2568[562 523 556 560 721 756 746 1167 746 376 657 778 556 222 496 255 556 289]2586 2588 556 2589[376 255 222 555 567 595 613 554 504 648 617 239 431 567 467 722 615 649 553 649 607 553 508 608 551 793 554 553 507 821 833 467 649 554 613 595]2625 2630 555 2631[595]2632 2635 554 2636 2639 239 2640[615]2641 2645 649 2646 2649 608 2650[553]2651 2653 555 2654 2657 595 2658 2659 613 2660 2664 554 2665 2668 648 2669[617 618]2671 2675 239 2676[658 431 567]2679 2682 467 2683 2685 615 2686[620]2687 2689 649 2690 2692 607 2693 2697 553 2698 2700 508 2701[507]2702 2707 608 2708 2711 793 2712 2714 553 2715 2717 507 2718[555 821 649 555 567 460 555 554 507 617 649 239 567 544 722 615 523 649 612 553 518 508 553 659 554 658 649 555 554 617 239 649 553 649 239 553 554 710 460 597 553]2759 2760 239 2761[431 869 839 731 511 548 612 555 565 567 460 551 554 791 515]2776 2777 612 2778[511 566 722 617 649 612 553 595 508 548 631 554 607 561 770 765 676 738 542 597 835 607 392]2801 2813 333 2814 2824 721 2825 2835 756 2836 2848 746 2849 2857 376 2858[481]2859 2861 376 2862 2863 255 2864[292 331 255]2867 2874 376 2875[657]2876 2884 556 2885[222 496]2887 2888 255 2889[301 331 255]2892 2893 289 2894[375 289]2896 2899 556 2900[578]2901 2904 333 2905[602 468 611 458 715 602 667]2912 2913 556 2914[667 966 754 829 717 951 893 667 500 1068 847 1100 831 725 550 673 556]2931 2932 278 2933[557 766 398 612 562 696 561 833 667 755 676 333 556 490 122 357 667 611 278 556 0 399 508 602 643]2958 2959 0 2960[752 722 716 705 723 726 635 722 807 716 660 528 917 758 699 598]2976 2977 706 2978[713 752 716 708 693 722 699 802 746 762 722 688 660 676 677 516 762 686 778 788 274 222 184 200 265 231 514 837 559 580 579 561 580 516 556 697 591 556 233 839 563]3019 3020 556 3021[523 557 548 556 228 555 482 551 352 837 522 575 556 555 837 556 551 391 837 572 557 744 719 278 324]3046 3047 1001 3048[727]3049 3052 1111 3053[1333 556 500 722 550 1284 1017 729 556 686 564 813 737 530 744 747 539 765 808 278 209 278 209 722 556 830 627]3080 3081 552 3082 3083 516 3084 3085 586 3086[504 553 1155 902 1167 922 1020 886 942 734 942 734 942 734 722 500 667 500 667 500 667 500 651 310 556 222 802 611 878 651 1333 952 667 556 824 698 931 805 778 556 979 748 581 410]3130 3131 582 3132[667 500 944 722 549 494 667 556 667 556 509 408]3144 3145 445 3146 3147 501 3148 3149 561 3150[327 677 345 961 680 333 750 672 476 778 556 405 333]3163 3165 590 3166[556 222 800 599 405 333 644 500 722 444 767 601 722]3179 3180 500 3181[556 789 678 611 278 669 525 714 549 669 525 778 556 667 500 722 556 722 333 667 500 787 614 755 684 667 611 524 735 667 571 1003 779 770 448 639 833 611 667 833 278 1185 570 896 478 556 667 278 556 368 347 242 851]3234 3235 556 3236 3237 548 3238[611]3239 3241 944 3242 3243 952 3244[549 607 333 503 450 627 474 700 291]3253 3254 556 3255 3256 833 3257[613 546 613 594 604 500 604]3264 3265 500 3266[333 383 273 248 415 721 764 944 921 556 649 667 611]]>>
<</Ascent 998/CIDSet 460 0 R/CapHeight 716/Descent -325/Flags 68/FontBBox[-517 -325 1359 998]/FontFamily(Arial)/FontFile2 461 0 R/FontName/CCNSQU+Arial,Italic/FontStretch/Normal/FontWeight 400/ItalicAngle -12/StemV 92/Type/FontDescriptor/XHeight 519>>
<</DecodeParms<</Columns 5/Predictor 12>>/Filter/FlateDecode/ID[<6DC5CE5D65714540BB609992CB9144CF><465E68ECEAAAF1468EBFC92FE35C54E6>]/Index[1 1 3 1 5 1 7 1 13 1 15 1 17 1 20 1 22 1 24 1 32 1 185 1 188 1 301 1 304 1 306 1 363 103]/Info 185 0 R/Length 180/Prev 344905/Root 187 0 R/Size 466/Type/XRef/W[1 3 1]>>stream
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) does not tolerate pervasive or severe harassment of any kind, including sexual harassment, whether it is within the agency, at research organizations that receive NIH funding, or anywhere else NIH-funded activities are conducted. Only in safe and respectful work environments can individuals achieve their greatest potential and carry out the important work that supports the NIH mission. To foster a work environment free from sexual harassment, NIH is bolstering policies, guidelines, requirements, and communications to make our expectations clear to the NIH workforce and NIH-funded organizations, and to take appropriate actions within our authority. We also want to ensure that individuals know their rights, where to report incidents of sexual harassment, and the resources available to them.
NIH strongly encourages people to report allegations of sexual harassment or assault to the appropriate authorities, which may include your local police department or your organization/institution equal employment opportunity (EEO) or human resources offices.
September 19, 2018Additional Information on Sexual Harassment Policy at NIHToday the National Science Foundation (NSF) announced a new policy that goes beyond prior frameworks and requires its awardee organizations to report findings and determinations of sexual harassment directly to the NSF.  Legal constraints that apply differently to NSF and NIH currently prevent NIH from immediate implementation of an identical policy.  A rulemaking process would be needed to determine if NIH can require the same responses from our awardee organizations.
Earlier this week I issued a statement that describes NIH’s commitment to address sexual harassment wherever NIH-funded activities take place.  To be more transparent about our efforts, NIH launched a new, central webpage that collects all of the materials for our anti-sexual harassment program. This includes clarification of our policies, both for extramural grantee institutions and for NIH staff, including the intramural scientific workforce, where we have a direct employer-employee relationship. In that latter regard, I have additional steps to report: NIH has developed a Federal Register Notice, outlining the terms of a comprehensive NIH Policy Manual Chapter — Preventing and Addressing Harassment and Inappropriate Conduct. The “public inspection” version is available for review in advance of tomorrow’s official posting. This Manual Chapter, to which all NIH staff are required to adhere, provides straightforward guidance for NIH staff — including clear definitions, procedures, and responsibilities for all affected parties. The Federal Register Notice also addresses NIH’s Policy Statement on Personal Relationships in the Workplace, which states that personal relationships in the intramural program (including romantic and/or sexual) between individuals in inherently unequal positions of power may be inappropriate in the workplace, are strongly discouraged, and must be disclosed.  By this posting in the Federal Register, NIH also encourages organizations receiving NIH funds to have in place similarly rigorous policies and related procedures for their employees, contractors, trainees, and fellows who engage in agency-funded activities.
The new NSF policy extends the oversight process by requiring grantee institutions to notify NSF of findings of harassment, or the cause for an administrative leave for a principal investigator (PI) or co-PI.  Ideally, all granting agencies of the U.S. government that support scientific research should adopt consistent approaches to the problem of sexual harassment.  As co-chairs of the National Science and Technology Council Committee on Science, Dr. France Córdova of NSF and I will work with that group with the goal of identifying and implementing uniform measures across the government that would be most effective in changing the pervasive culture of sexual harassment in science.  Finally, to help guide NIH’s plans and decisions in this critically important issue, I will establish a working group of my Advisory Committee to the Director (ACD) to help guide NIH’s role in oversight.  The group will consist of both extramural and intramural experts, and will be charged at the next ACD meeting in December.
The entire biomedical research community must work together to put an end to sexual harassment in science. I know I can count on the NIH and our extramural community to work together to meet this challenge.
A lock (LockA locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) complies with applicable Federal civil rights laws and does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, religion, or sex (including pregnancy, sexual orientation, and gender identity). HHS does not exclude people or treat them differently because of race, color, national origin, age, disability, religion, or sex (including pregnancy, sexual orientation, and gender identity).
If you believe that HHS has failed to provide these services or discriminated in another way on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, or sex, you can file a grievance with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office for Civil Rights, electronically through the Office for Civil Rights Complaint Portal, or by mail or phone at:
A lock (LockA locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
This privacy policy describes what information HHS collects from you when you visit our websites and how we handle that information. This policy applies to HHS.gov and a number of other HHS websites with unique domains, such as StopBullying.gov. However, some HHS websites maintain their own privacy policies. You can find links to the applicable privacy policy in the footer of every HHS website.
We do not collect personally identifiable information (PII) about you unless you choose to provide that information to us.
Any personally identifiable information (PII) you choose to provide is protected by privacy and security practices.
We may automatically collect and temporarily store information related to your visit to our website that is not personally identifiable information (PII).
HHS does not disclose, give, sell, or transfer any personally identifiable information (PII) about our visitors unless required for law enforcement or by federal law.
For more information on your health information privacy and security rights, or on the HIPAA Privacy and Security Rules, visit the HHS Office for Civil Rights website.
It is the mission of HHS to enhance and protect the health and well-being of all Americans. HHS fulfills that mission by providing effective health and human services and fostering advances in medicine, public health, and social services. HHS recognizes the importance of protecting the personally identifiable information (PII) entrusted to us by millions of members of public and employees alike, and has built a robust privacy program to safeguard this information and ensure that HHS upholds Americans' privacy rights.
The list of PIAs and Third-Party Websites and Applications (TWPA) PIAs is available at HHS Privacy Impact Assessments.
For a list of all publicly available HHS privacy policies, including any directives, instructions, handbooks, manuals, or other guidance, visit:
To learn more about what is covered under the Privacy Act, please read information about the Privacy Act at HHS. If you have privacy questions or issues regarding the Privacy Act, contact an HHS Privacy Act Contact. Also see the Privacy Act of 1974 (Department of Justice).
HHS publishes SORNs to provide public notice of the records it maintains about individuals which are retrieved by personal identifier. For a list of all of the Department's systems of records see HHS SORNs.
For the complete list of the HHS matching programs currently in effect including the matching agreements and public notice describing each program, see HHS Computer Matching Agreements.
For more information on the Department's final rules published in the Federal Register that promulgate Privacy Act exemptions claimed for HHS's systems of records, see the HHS Privacy Act.
For a list of Privacy Act implementation rules promulgated pursuant to 5 U.S.C. § 552a(f), see the HHS Privacy Act.
For instructions for individuals who wish to request access to or amendment of their records pursuant to 5 U.S.C. § 552a(d), see How to Make a Privacy Request.
HHS Privacy Act Contacts, if the question or complaint concerns federal agency records about individuals retrieved by personal identifier.
PII is information that can be used to distinguish or trace an individual’s identity, either alone or when combined with other information that is linked or linkable to a specific individual.
Contextual information, such as a file for a specific health condition that contains a list of treated patients.
The HHS Chief Information Officer (CIO) also holds the position of Senior Agency Official for Privacy (SAOP), ensuring privacy receives senior-level recognition and has visibility across the Department.
Each Operating Division has, at a minimum, a Senior Official for Privacy (SOP) to oversee privacy compliance activities. The SOP contact information is included below:
When you visit our websites, we use Google's Universal Analytics (UA) software to automatically gather and temporarily store a variety of information about your visit. The basic information we collect during your visit includes:
The name of the domain you use to access the Internet (for example, Verizon.com if you are using a Verizon online account or stanford.edu if you are connecting from Stanford University's domain);
We do not associate any of the data we automatically collect with your personally identifiable information (PII). Instead, we aggregate this data from all users' visits in order to improve our website and provide a better user experience to our visitors. The aggregate data is available only to Web managers and other designated staff who require this information to perform their duties. We retain this information only for as long as needed for proper analysis. The Google Analytics Privacy Policy is available at https://www.google.com/intl/en/policies/privacy/
If you choose to provide HHS with your personally identifiable information (PII) —for example, by completing a "Contact Us" form, leaving a comment, sending an email, or completing a survey—we may use that information to respond to your message and/or help us get you the information or services you requested. Submitting personally identifiable information (PII) such as name, address, telephone number, email address, etc. is voluntary and is not required to access information on our website.
We retain the information only for as long as necessary to respond to your question or request, in most cases no longer than three months. We maintain and destroy information submitted electronically as required by the Federal Records Act and the National Archives and Records Administration's (NARA) records schedules. It may be subject to disclosure in certain cases (for example, if required by a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request, court order, or Congressional access request, or if authorized by a Privacy Act SORN). The information is subject to the Privacy Act if maintained in a Privacy Act system.
HHS also automatically receives information when you visit our websites that is not personally identifiable information (PII). For more information, see Information Automatically Collected and Stored.
The Department will take all reasonable steps necessary to protect the privacy and safety of any child from whom we collect information, as required by the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA). A child's parent or guardian is required to provide consent before HHS collects, uses, or shares personally identifiable information (PII) from a child under age 13.
Specific HHS websites will provide information and instructions for how we obtain consent when collecting information about a child. The website will specify exactly what how the information is used, who sees it, and how long it is kept.
If you are under 13 and visit any websites, the law says that you and your parents are in charge of what personally identifiable information (PII) the websites can know about you. Some examples of personally identifiable information (PII) are your full name, home address, email address, phone number, age, and gender.
Websites can automatically place small text files, known as "cookies," on their visitors' computers. Cookies identify the unique browser used by the visitor unless you delete them or they expire. On each subsequent visit to the website, the visitor's browser will retrieve the cookie, allowing HHS to aggregate the number of return visitors. HHS uses "cookies" to test and optimize our websites' design and content. We use two types of cookies on HHS websites:
We use session cookies to gather data for technical purposes, such as improving navigation through our website and generating statistics about how the website is used. Session cookies are temporary text files that expire when you leave our website. Cookies delete automatically from your computer as soon as they expire. We do not use session cookies to collect personally identifiable information (PII), and we do not share data collected from session cookies.
We use multi-session cookies, or persistent cookies, to customize our website for frequent visitors and to test variations of website design and content. Multi-session cookies are cookies that are stored over more than a single session on your computer. We do not use multi-session cookies to collect personally identifiable information (PII), and we do not share data collected from multi-session cookies. Our multi-session cookies expire two years after your last visit to our website. These cookies delete automatically from your computer as soon as they expire.
You can block cookies from your computer by opting out . Blocking session cookies from your computer will not affect your access to the content and tools on our websites. Blocking multi-session or persistent cookies may affect the personalization of the information on these websites.
On some portions of our website, we have enabled Google's Universal Analytics (UA) and other third-party software (listed below) to provide aggregate demographic and interest data of our visitors. While some websites use these tools to present you with advertisements, HHS only uses them to measure demographic data. HHS has no control over advertisements presented to you on other websites. This means that third-party vendors, including Google, may show you public health campaign advertisements created by HHS and its agencies on non-government websites based on your visits to HHS websites. For the software listed below, we have included links to the company's websites where you can opt-out of having these tools collect data and/or serve you interest-based advertising.
DoubleClick: HHS uses DoubleClick to understand the characteristics and demographics of the people who visit HHS websites. HHS staff only conducts analyses on the aggregated data from DoubleClick. DoubleClick does not collect personally identifiable information (PII) from HHS websites. The DoubleClick Privacy Policy is available at https://www.google.com/intl/en/policies/privacy/.
Quantcast: HHS uses Quantcast to understand the characteristics and demographics of the people who visit HHS websites. HHS staff only conducts analyses on the aggregated data from Quantcast. Quantcast does not collect personally identifiable information (PII) from HHS websites. The Quantcast Privacy Policy is available at https://www.quantcast.com/how-we-do-it/consumer-choice/privacy-policy/.
HHS maintains official pages or accounts on third-party websites in order to better engage and communicate with the public. Third-party websites are websites that we do not maintain or control. We have accounts on some third-party websites so we can connect with people interested in health and human services information. Examples of third-party websites that HHS uses include YouTube, Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter.
All official HHS information available on third-party websites is also available on HHS websites. The third-party website's security and privacy policies govern your activity on their website. Users of third-party websites often share information with the public, user communities, and/or the third-party organization operating the website. It is important for you to review the privacy policies of third-party websites so you understand how they use and share your information. You should also adjust the privacy settings of your account on any third-party website to match your preferences.
If you have an account or profile with a third-party website and choose to follow, like, friend, or comment on a third-party website managed by HHS, certain personally identifiable information (PII) associated with your account may be available to us based on the privacy policies of the third-party website and your privacy settings within that website. We do not share personally identifiable information available through these websites.
HHS conducts and publishes a Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) for each use of a third-party website. Each use of a third-party website may have unique features or practices. HHS sometimes collects and uses the information made available through third-party websites.
In order to comply with the Federal Records Act, HHS archives some information that users submit or publish when engaging with the HHS through official HHS pages or accounts on third-party websites (e.g., by sending a message, posting a comment, "following," "friending," or taking similar actions). This information may contain personally identifiable information (PII), such as an individual's username, other public account information, and any information provided in a message or comment, when such information is available based on the user's privacy settings and the terms of the site. For example:
On Facebook, HHS may automatically archive posts, messages, replies and comments sent to or from official HHS.gov accounts in the following sections: 'About,' 'Albums,' 'Event details,' 'Event discussions,' 'Photo activity,' 'Private messages,' 'Reviews' and 'Timeline activity'.
AddThis: HHS offers AddThis on its websites, giving visitors the option to bookmark and share HHS website content on certain social media websites. Using AddThis on HHS websites does not require registration or personally identifiable information (PII). The AddThis Privacy Policy is available at http://www.addthis.com/privacy.
ArchiveSocial: HHS uses ArchiveSocial to interface directly with each social network to capture and preserve data in its native form. The ArchiveSocial Privacy Policy is available at https://archivesocial.com/privacy/.
Bit.ly: HHS uses Bit.ly to shorten long URLs for use in email and social media messages. Bit.ly provides analytics on how many people clicked on the URLs distributed by HHS. Bit.ly analytics do not provide any personally identifiable information (PII) about the visitors who click the shortened links. The Bit.ly Privacy Policy is available at http://bit.ly/pages/privacy.
CrazyEgg: HHS uses CrazyEgg to obtain information on how visitors are interacting with specific pages on HHS.gov websites. This allows HHS to evaluate and, if necessary or beneficial, to modify its websites to improve value and usability. The data CrazyEgg collects includes information about how visitors navigate around a website and the most commonly clicked links on a specific page. CrazyEgg does not collect personally identifiable information (PII). The Crazy Egg Privacy Policy is available at http://www.crazyegg.com/privacy.
Google AdWords: HHS occasionally uses Google AdWords to provide online advertisement delivery and tracking. HHS may employ tools provided by Google AdWords to support Display Advertising, including Remarketing, Google Display Network Impression Reporting, data collection via advertising cookies and anonymous identifiers, the DoubleClick Campaign Manager integration, and Google Analytics Demographics and Interest Reporting. This means that third-party vendors, including Google, may show you public health campaign advertisements created by HHS and its agencies on non-government websites based on your visits to HHS websites. To implement these tools, HHS and third-party vendors, including Google, use first-party cookies and third-party cookies together to inform, optimize, and serve ads based on past visits to HHS websites. These cookies collect information about visits to HHS websites, but do not collect personally identifiable information (PII). The Google AdWords Privacy Policy is available at https://www.google.com/intl/en/policies/privacy/.
Google Analytics: HHS may employ tools provided by Google Analytics to support Display Advertising, including Remarketing, Google Display Network Impression Reporting, data collection via advertising cookies and anonymous identifiers, the DoubleClick Campaign Manager integration and/or Google Analytics Demographics and Interest Reporting. This means that third-party vendors, including Google, may show you public health campaign advertisements created by HHS and its agencies on non-government websites based on your visits to HHS websites. To implement these tools, HHS and third-party vendors, including Google, use first-party cookies and third-party cookies together to inform, optimize, and serve ads based on past visits to HHS websites. These cookies collect information about visits to HHS websites, but do not collect personally identifiable information (PII). The Google Analytics Privacy Policy is available at https://www.google.com/intl/en/policies/privacy/.
Pagefreezer: HHS uses Pagefreezer archiving software to archive content from the HHS.gov website and five topical websites. This software does not require users to submit personally identifiable information (PII), nor does HHS ask for this information. Pagefreezer Privacy Policy is available at https://www.pagefreezer.com/privacy-policy/.
Qualtrics: HHS uses Qualtrics survey software approved by the Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program (FEDRamp) to collect feedback from HHS website visitors. Qualtrics is implemented on HHS websites both as on-page and pop-up surveys. HHS uses survey results to measure visitor satisfaction with HHS websites. This survey software does not require users to submit personally identifiable information (PII), nor does HHS ask for this information in its surveys. The survey reports are available only to HHS managers, members of the HHS Communications and Web Teams, and other designated HHS staff who require this information to perform their job duties. The Qualtrics Privacy Policy is available at https://www.qualtrics.com/privacy-statement/.
Salesforce: HHS uses Salesforce to email newsletters and other messages to visitors who subscribe to them on HHS websites. Only HHS staff and managers who email newsletters using Salesforce or monitor the results of email initiatives have access to the subscriber lists. Salesforce never allows access to the subscriber lists to anyone outside of HHS for any purpose. Salesforce also provides aggregate data, such as email open rates and total clicks on links. The Salesforce Privacy Policy is available at https://www.salesforce.com/company/privacy/full_privacy/.
Siteimprove: HHS uses Siteimprove to manage our website. It provides the ASPA Digital team with information allowing them to make incremental changes to the sites managed by this team. Areas that Siteimprove provides information includes broken links, misspellings, accessibility, analytics, etc. Only HHS staff and managers who manage the ASPA managed websites have access to the Siteimprove information. The Siteimprove Privacy Policy is available at https://siteimprove.com/en/privacy/privacy-policy/.
Widgets: HHS offers widgets that provide specific HHS site content to any website that includes the widget code. You can install an HHS widget on any website simply by adding the HHS-provided code to a website's source HTML code. If you choose to install HHS widgets, they will not collect any type of personally identifiable information (PII) from your websites visitors.
In order to maintain website security and ensure HHS websites are available to the public, we use software programs to monitor traffic and identify unauthorized attempts to upload or change information or otherwise cause damage to HHS websites. Law enforcement may use information from these tools to help identify an individual in the event of investigations and as part of any required legal process.
The U.S. Government maintains this website and there are federal laws that protect it. The government can arrest and prosecute individuals for illegal activity if they violate these laws.
A lock (LockA locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
[ Introduction ] [ Authorization ] [ Guidelines ] [ Scope ] [ Rules of Engagement ] [ Reporting a Vulnerability ] [ Disclosure ] [ Acknowledgments ] [ Questions ]
The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is committed to ensuring the security of the American public by protecting their information from unwarranted disclosure. This policy is intended to give security researchers clear guidelines for conducting vulnerability discovery activities and to convey our preferences in how to submit discovered vulnerabilities to us.
This policy describes what systems and types of research are covered under this policy, how to send us vulnerability reports, and how long we ask security researchers to wait before publicly disclosing vulnerabilities.
We want security researchers to feel comfortable reporting vulnerabilities they’ve discovered – as set out in this policy – so we can fix them and keep our users safe. We have developed this policy to reflect our values and uphold our sense of responsibility to security researchers who share their expertise with us in good faith.
If you make a good faith effort to comply with this policy during your security research, we will consider your research to be authorized, we will work with you to understand and resolve the issue quickly, and HHS will not recommend or pursue legal action related to your research.
Make every effort to avoid privacy violations, degradation of user experience, disruption to production systems, and destruction or manipulation of data.
Only use exploits to the extent necessary to confirm a vulnerability’s presence. Do not use an exploit to compromise or exfiltrate data, establish command line access and/or persistence, or use the exploit to “pivot” to other systems.
You do not intentionally compromise the privacy or safety of HHS personnel (e.g. civilian employees or military members), or any third parties.
You do not intentionally compromise the intellectual property or other commercial or financial interests of any HHS personnel or entities, or any third parties.
Once you’ve established that a vulnerability exists or encounter any sensitive data (including personally identifiable information, financial information, or proprietary information or trade secrets of any party), you must stop your test, notify us immediately, and not disclose this data to anyone else.
All systems and services associated with domains listed below are in scope.  Likewise, subdomains of each listing, unless explicitly excluded, are always in scope.  Additionally, any website published with a link to this policy shall be considered in scope.  Vulnerabilities found in non-federal systems from our vendors fall outside of this policy’s scope and should be reported directly to the vendor according to their disclosure policy (if any). If you aren’t sure whether a system or endpoint is in scope or not, contact support@responsibledisclosure.com before starting your research or at the security contact for the system’s domain name listed in the .gov WHOIS.
Though we develop and maintain other internet-accessible systems or services, we ask that active research and testing only be conducted on the systems and services covered by the scope of this document. If there is a system not in scope that you think merits testing, please contact us to discuss it first. We will increase the scope of this policy over time.
disclose vulnerability information except as set forth in the ‘Reporting a Vulnerability’ and ‘Disclosure’ sections below,
test in a manner which could degrade the operation of HHS systems; or intentionally impair, disrupt, or disable HHS systems,
use an exploit to exfiltrate data, establish command line access, establish a persistent presence on HHS systems, or “pivot” to other HHS systems.
View or store HHS nonpublic data only to the extent necessary to document the presence of a potential vulnerability.
We accept vulnerability reports at https://hhs.responsibledisclosure.com. Reports may be submitted anonymously.  We do not support PGP-encrypted emails at this time.
Information submitted under this policy will be used for defensive purposes only – to mitigate or remediate vulnerabilities. If your findings include newly discovered vulnerabilities that affect all users of a product or service and not solely HHS, we may share your report with the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, where it will be handled under their coordinated vulnerability disclosure process. We will not share your name or contact information without express permission.
By clicking “Submit Report,” you are indicating that you have read, understand, and agree to the guidelines described in this policy for the conduct of security research and disclosure of vulnerabilities or indicators of vulnerabilities related to HHS information systems, and consent to having the contents of the communication and follow-up communications stored on a U.S. Government information system.
Adhere to all legal terms and conditions outlined at https://www.hhs.gov/vulnerability-disclosure-policy and the HHS Responsible Disclosure Terms of Service.
Offer a detailed description of the steps needed to reproduce the vulnerability (proof of concept scripts or screenshots are helpful).
HHS is committed to timely correction of vulnerabilities. However, we recognize that public disclosure of a vulnerability in absence of a readily available corrective action likely increases versus decreases risk. Accordingly, we require that you refrain from sharing information about discovered vulnerabilities for 90 calendar days after you have received our acknowledgement of receipt of your report. If you believe others should be informed of the vulnerability prior to our implementation of corrective actions, we require that you coordinate in advance with us.
We may share vulnerability reports with the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), as well as any affected vendors. We will not share names or contact data of security researchers unless given explicit permission.
For HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Policy Program Acknowledgments please visit https://www.hhs.gov/vulnerability-disclosure-policy/acknowledgments
Questions regarding this policy may be sent to HHS.Cybersecurity@hhs.gov. We also invite you to contact us with suggestions for improving this policy.
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (Title IX) prohibits discrimination based on sex in education programs and activities that receive federal financial assistance. Title IX states: “No person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance[.]” All federal agencies that provide grants of financial assistance are required to enforce Title IX’s nondiscrimination mandate. The U.S. Department of Education (Department) gives grants of financial assistance to schools and colleges and to certain other entities, including vocational rehabilitation programs and libraries.
In 1975, the Department’s predecessor, the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, issued final regulations implementing Title IX. In 2020, the Department amended the Title IX regulations after public notice and comment. The Title IX regulations, which are codified in the Code of Federal Regulations at 34 CFR Part 106, are enforced by the Department’s Office for Civil Rights (OCR).
Examples of the types of discrimination that are covered under Title IX include sexual harassment; the failure to provide equal athletic opportunity; sex-based discrimination in a school’s science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) courses and programs; and discrimination based on pregnancy. A fuller list of Title IX issues OCR addresses appears here.
Title IX also prohibits retaliation for filing an OCR complaint or for advocating for a right protected by Title IX and discrimination in employment which is based on sex. However, employment discrimination complaints filed with OCR are generally referred to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
For additional information about the Department’s current Title IX regulations, please see OCR’s Questions and Answers resource and related appendix on the Title IX Regulations on Sexual Harassment. The Q&A clarifies how OCR interprets schools’ existing obligations under the current regulations, including the areas in which schools have discretion in their procedures for responding to reports of sexual harassment. The appendix provides examples of Title IX procedures that schools may find helpful in implementing the current regulations and can adapt to their own circumstances. Please also note that OCR issued a Letter to Students, Educators, and other Stakeholders re Victim Rights Law Center et al. v. Cardona (Aug. 24, 2021) addressing one provision of the current regulations.
In 2022 and 2023, the Department published two notices of proposed rulemaking to amend its Title IX regulations. On July 12, 2022, the Department published a notice of proposed rulemaking to amend its Title IX regulations with a 60-day comment period, which closed on September 12, 2022 (July 2022 NPRM). You can access the July 2022 NPRM and view submitted comments here, and you can find a fact sheet about the July 2022 NPRM here.
On April 13, 2023, the Department published in the Federal Register a notice of proposed rulemaking to address sex-related eligibility criteria for male and female athletic teams under the Department’s Title IX regulations with a 30-day comment period, which closed on May 15, 2023 (Athletics NPRM). You can access the Athletics NPRM and view submitted comments here, and you can find a fact sheet about the Athletics NPRM here.
Following the Department’s review and consideration of the comments received on the proposed regulations, the resulting final regulations and their effective date will be published in the Federal Register. In addition, the preamble to the final regulations will include a summary of the comments received, the Department’s response to the comments, and an explanation of any changes made to the regulations that differ from the proposed regulations.
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (Title IX) prohibits discrimination based on sex in education programs and activities that receive federal financial assistance. Title IX states: “No person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance[.]” All federal agencies that provide grants of financial assistance are required to enforce Title IX’s nondiscrimination mandate. The U.S. Department of Education (Department) gives grants of financial assistance to schools and colleges and to certain other entities, including vocational rehabilitation programs and libraries.
In 1975, the Department’s predecessor, the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, issued final regulations implementing Title IX. In 2020, the Department amended the Title IX regulations after public notice and comment. The Title IX regulations, which are codified in the Code of Federal Regulations at 34 CFR Part 106, are enforced by the Department’s Office for Civil Rights (OCR).
Examples of the types of discrimination that are covered under Title IX include sexual harassment; the failure to provide equal athletic opportunity; sex-based discrimination in a school’s science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) courses and programs; and discrimination based on pregnancy. A fuller list of Title IX issues OCR addresses appears here.
Title IX also prohibits retaliation for filing an OCR complaint or for advocating for a right protected by Title IX and discrimination in employment which is based on sex. However, employment discrimination complaints filed with OCR are generally referred to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
For additional information about the Department’s current Title IX regulations, please see OCR’s Questions and Answers resource and related appendix on the Title IX Regulations on Sexual Harassment. The Q&A clarifies how OCR interprets schools’ existing obligations under the current regulations, including the areas in which schools have discretion in their procedures for responding to reports of sexual harassment. The appendix provides examples of Title IX procedures that schools may find helpful in implementing the current regulations and can adapt to their own circumstances. Please also note that OCR issued a Letter to Students, Educators, and other Stakeholders re Victim Rights Law Center et al. v. Cardona (Aug. 24, 2021) addressing one provision of the current regulations.
In 2022 and 2023, the Department published two notices of proposed rulemaking to amend its Title IX regulations. On July 12, 2022, the Department published a notice of proposed rulemaking to amend its Title IX regulations with a 60-day comment period, which closed on September 12, 2022 (July 2022 NPRM). You can access the July 2022 NPRM and view submitted comments here, and you can find a fact sheet about the July 2022 NPRM here.
On April 13, 2023, the Department published in the Federal Register a notice of proposed rulemaking to address sex-related eligibility criteria for male and female athletic teams under the Department’s Title IX regulations with a 30-day comment period, which closed on May 15, 2023 (Athletics NPRM). You can access the Athletics NPRM and view submitted comments here, and you can find a fact sheet about the Athletics NPRM here.
Following the Department’s review and consideration of the comments received on the proposed regulations, the resulting final regulations and their effective date will be published in the Federal Register. In addition, the preamble to the final regulations will include a summary of the comments received, the Department’s response to the comments, and an explanation of any changes made to the regulations that differ from the proposed regulations.
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
Biden-Harris Administration Releases Final Rules that Strengthen Accountability for Colleges and Consumer Protection for Students
U.S. Department of Education’s Office for Civil Rights Announces Resolution of Sex-Based Harassment Investigation of Taft College in California
Biden-Harris Administration Awards $14 Million Under First-Ever Fostering Diverse Schools Demonstration Grant Program
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Legislation, regulations, guidance, and other policy documents can be found here for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), and other topics.
Please note that in the U.S., the federal role in education is limited. Because of the Tenth Amendment, most education policy is decided at the state and local levels.  So, if you have a question about a policy or issue, you may want to check with the relevant organization in your state or school district.
Text of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, as amended through 12/27/22:  PDF (1.2M) |  Text (3.3M)
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
Newly updated resource document explains how the ADA applies to job applicants and employees with visual disabilities
A Message from EEOC Chair Charlotte A. Burrows on the 60th Anniversary of the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom
The EEOC’s updated resource document describes two workplace protections that federal law provides to workers with hearing disabilities.
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) partners with Tribal Employment Rights Offices (TEROs) to protect the employment rights of Native Americans and Alaska Natives.
The 2022 EEO-1 Component 1 data collection will open on Tuesday, October 31, 2023. All updates, including the 2022 Instruction Booklet, will be posted to www.eeocdata.org/eeo1 as they become available.
Jump To: Source CreditMiscellaneousReferences In TextAmendmentsEffective DateShort TitleRegulationsExecutive Documents
No person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance, except that:
in regard to admissions to educational institutions, this section shall apply only to institutions of vocational education, professional education, and graduate higher education, and to public institutions of undergraduate higher education;
in regard to admissions to educational institutions, this section shall not apply (A) for one year from June 23, 1972, nor for six years after June 23, 1972, in the case of an educational institution which has begun the process of changing from being an institution which admits only students of one sex to being an institution which admits students of both sexes, but only if it is carrying out a plan for such a change which is approved by the Secretary of Education or (B) for seven years from the date an educational institution begins the process of changing from being an institution which admits only students of only one sex to being an institution which admits students of both sexes, but only if it is carrying out a plan for such a change which is approved by the Secretary of Education, whichever is the later;
this section shall not apply to an educational institution which is controlled by a religious organization if the application of this subsection would not be consistent with the religious tenets of such organization;
this section shall not apply to an educational institution whose primary purpose is the training of individuals for the military services of the United States, or the merchant marine;
in regard to admissions this section shall not apply to any public institution of undergraduate higher education which is an institution that traditionally and continually from its establishment has had a policy of admitting only students of one sex;
(A) of a social fraternity or social sorority which is exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of title 26, the active membership of which consists primarily of students in attendance at an institution of higher education, or
(B) of the Young Men's Christian Association, Young Women's Christian Association, Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts, Camp Fire Girls, and voluntary youth service organizations which are so exempt, the membership of which has traditionally been limited to persons of one sex and principally to persons of less than nineteen years of age;
(A) any program or activity of the American Legion undertaken in connection with the organization or operation of any Boys State conference, Boys Nation conference, Girls State conference, or Girls Nation conference; or
(i) the promotion of any Boys State conference, Boys Nation conference, Girls State conference, or Girls Nation conference; or
this section shall not preclude father-son or mother-daughter activities at an educational institution, but if such activities are provided for students of one sex, opportunities for reasonably comparable activities shall be provided for students of the other sex; and
this section shall not apply with respect to any scholarship or other financial assistance awarded by an institution of higher education to any individual because such individual has received such award in any pageant in which the attainment of such award is based upon a combination of factors related to the personal appearance, poise, and talent of such individual and in which participation is limited to individuals of one sex only, so long as such pageant is in compliance with other nondiscrimination provisions of Federal law.
(b) Preferential or disparate treatment because of imbalance in participation or receipt of Federal benefits; statistical evidence of imbalance
Nothing contained in subsection (a) of this section shall be interpreted to require any educational institution to grant preferential or disparate treatment to the members of one sex on account of an imbalance which may exist with respect to the total number or percentage of persons of that sex participating in or receiving the benefits of any federally supported program or activity, in comparison with the total number or percentage of persons of that sex in any community, State, section, or other area: Provided, That this subsection shall not be construed to prevent the consideration in any hearing or proceeding under this chapter of statistical evidence tending to show that such an imbalance exists with respect to the participation in, or receipt of the benefits of, any such program or activity by the members of one sex.
For purposes of this chapter an educational institution means any public or private preschool, elementary, or secondary school, or any institution of vocational, professional, or higher education, except that in the case of an educational institution composed of more than one school, college, or department which are administratively separate units, such term means each such school, college, or department.
This chapter, referred to in subsecs. (b) and (c), was in the original "this title", meaning title IX of Pub. L. 92–318 which enacted this chapter and amended sections 203 and 213 of Title 29, Labor, and sections 2000c, 2000c–6, 2000c–9, and 2000h–2 of Title 42, The Public Health and Welfare. For complete classification of title IX to the Code, see Short Title note below and Tables.
1986-Subsec. (a)(6)(A). Pub. L. 99–514 substituted "Internal Revenue Code of 1986" for "Internal Revenue Code of 1954", which for purposes of codification was translated as "title 26" thus requiring no change in text.
1976-Subsec. (a)(6) to (9). Pub. L. 94–482 substituted "this" for "This" in par. (6) and added pars. (7) to (9).
, provided that: "The amendment made by subsection (a) [amending this section] shall take effect upon the date of enactment of this Act [Oct. 12, 1976]."
, provided that: "The provisions of the amendment made by subsection (a) [amending this section] shall be effective on, and retroactive to, July 1, 1972."
, provided that: "This Act [enacting sections 1687 and 1688 of this title and section 2000d–4a of Title 42, The Public Health and Welfare, amending sections 706 and 794 of Title 29, Labor, and section 6107 of Title 42, and enacting provisions set out as notes under sections 1687 and 1688 of this title] may be cited as the 'Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987'."
, provided "That title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (20 U.S.C. 1681 et seq.; Public Law 92–318) [title IX of Pub. L. 92–318, enacting this chapter and amending sections 203 and 213 of Title 29, Labor, and sections 2000c, 2000c–6, 2000c–9, and 2000h–2 of Title 42, The Public Health and Welfare] may be cited as the 'Patsy Takemoto Mink Equal Opportunity in Education Act'."
"Secretary" substituted for "Commissioner" in subsec. (a)(2) pursuant to sections 301(a)(1) and 507 of Pub. L. 96–88, which are classified to sections 3441(a)(1) and 3507 of this title and which transferred functions of Commissioner of Education to Secretary of Education.
, directed Secretary to prepare and publish, not more than 30 days after Aug. 21, 1974, proposed regulations implementing the provisions of this chapter regarding prohibition of sex discrimination in federally assisted programs, including reasonable regulations for intercollegiate athletic activities considering the nature of the particular sports.
For provisions relating to the coordination of implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter by the Attorney General, see section 1–201(b) of Ex. Ord. No. 12250, Nov. 2, 1980, 45 F.R. 72995, set out under section 2000d–1 of Title 42, The Public Health and Welfare.
Ex. Ord. No. 14021. Guaranteeing an Educational Environment Free From Discrimination on the Basis of Sex, Including Sexual Orientation or Gender Identity
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Policy. It is the policy of my Administration that all students should be guaranteed an educational environment free from discrimination on the basis of sex, including discrimination in the form of sexual harassment, which encompasses sexual violence, and including discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity. For students attending schools and other educational institutions that receive Federal financial assistance, this guarantee is codified, in part, in Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, 20 U.S.C. 1681 et seq., which prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex in education programs or activities receiving Federal financial assistance.
Sec. 2. Review of Agency Actions. (a) Within 100 days of the date of this order [Mar. 8, 2021], the Secretary of Education, in consultation with the Attorney General, shall review all existing regulations, orders, guidance documents, policies, and any other similar agency actions (collectively, agency actions) that are or may be inconsistent with the policy set forth in section 1 of this order, and provide the findings of this review to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
(i) As part of the review required under subsection (a) of this section, the Secretary of Education shall review the rule entitled "Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Sex in Education Programs or Activities Receiving Federal Financial Assistance," 85 FR 30026 (May 19, 2020), and any other agency actions taken pursuant to that rule, for consistency with governing law, including Title IX, and with the policy set forth in section 1 of this order.
(ii) As soon as practicable, and as appropriate and consistent with applicable law, the Secretary of Education shall review existing guidance and issue new guidance as needed on the implementation of the rule described in subsection (a)(i) of this section, for consistency with governing law, including Title IX, and with the policy set forth in section 1 of this order.
(iii) The Secretary of Education shall consider suspending, revising, or rescinding-or publishing for notice and comment proposed rules suspending, revising, or rescinding-those agency actions that are inconsistent with the policy set forth in section 1 of this order as soon as practicable and as appropriate and consistent with applicable law, and may issue such requests for information as would facilitate doing so.
(b) The Secretary of Education shall consider taking additional enforcement actions, as appropriate and consistent with applicable law, to enforce the policy set forth in section 1 of this order as well as legal prohibitions on sex discrimination in the form of sexual harassment, which encompasses sexual violence, to the fullest extent permissible under law; to account for intersecting forms of prohibited discrimination that can affect the availability of resources and support for students who have experienced sex discrimination, including discrimination on the basis of race, disability, and national origin; to account for the significant rates at which students who identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ+) are subject to sexual harassment, which encompasses sexual violence; to ensure that educational institutions are providing appropriate support for students who have experienced sex discrimination; and to ensure that their school procedures are fair and equitable for all.
(ii) the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budgetary, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b) This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(c) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
Due to aggressive automated scraping of FederalRegister.gov and eCFR.gov, programmatic access to these sites is limited to access to our extensive developer APIs.
If you are human user receiving this message, we can add your IP address to a set of IPs that can access FederalRegister.gov & eCFR.gov; complete the CAPTCHA (bot test) below and click "Request Access". This process will be necessary for each IP address you wish to access the site from, requests are valid for approximately one quarter (three months) after which the process may need to be repeated.
If you want to request a wider IP range, first request access for your current IP, and then use the "Site Feedback" button found in the lower left-hand side to make the request.
The purpose of this part is to effectuate title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, as amended by Pub. L. 93–568, 88 Stat. 1855 (except sections 904 and 906 of those Amendments) which is designed to eliminate (with certain exceptions) discrimination on the basis of sex in any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance, whether or not such program or activity is offered or sponsored by an educational institution as defined in this part. This part is also intended to effectuate section 844 of the Education Amendments of 1974, Pub. L. 93–380, 88 Stat. 484. The effective date of this part shall be July 21, 1975.
(Authority: Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682, as amended by Pub. L. 93–568, 88 Stat. 1855, and sec. 844, Education Amendments of 1974, 88 Stat. 484, Pub. L. 93–380)
(a) Title IX means title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, Pub. L. 92–318, as amended by section 3 of Pub. L. 93–568, 88 Stat. 1855, except sections 904 and 906 thereof; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682, 1683, 1685, 1686.
(e) Reviewing Authority means that component of the Department delegated authority by the Secretary to appoint, and to review the decisions of, administrative law judges in cases arising under this part.
(f) Administrative law judge means a person appointed by the reviewing authority to preside over a hearing held under this part.
(g) Federal financial assistance means any of the following, when authorized or extended under a law administered by the Department:
(i) The acquisition, construction, renovation, restoration, or repair of a building or facility or any portion thereof; and
(ii) Scholarships, loans, grants, wages or other funds extended to any entity for payment to or on behalf of students admitted to that entity, or extended directly to such students for payment to that entity.
(2) A grant of Federal real or personal property or any interest therein, including surplus property, and the proceeds of the sale or transfer of such property, if the Federal share of the fair market value of the property is not, upon such sale or transfer, properly accounted for to the Federal Government.
(4) Sale or lease of Federal property or any interest therein at nominal consideration, or at consideration reduced for the purpose of assisting the recipient or in recognition of public interest to be served thereby, or permission to use Federal property or any interest therein without consideration.
(5) Any other contract, agreement, or arrangement which has as one of its purposes the provision of assistance to any education program or activity, except a contract of insurance or guaranty.
(1)(i) A department, agency, special purpose district, or other instrumentality of a State or local government; or
(ii) The entity of a State or local government that distributes such assistance and each such department or agency (and each other State or local government entity) to which the assistance is extended, in the case of assistance to a State or local government;
(ii) A local educational agency (as defined in 20 U.S.C. 8801), system of vocational education, or other school system;
(A) If assistance is extended to such corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship as a whole; or
(B) Which is principally engaged in the business of providing education, health care, housing, social services, or parks and recreation; or
(ii) The entire plant or other comparable, geographically separate facility to which Federal financial assistance is extended, in the case of any other corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship; or
(4) Any other entity that is established by two or more of the entities described in paragraph (h)(1), (2), or (3) of this section; any part of which is extended Federal financial assistance.
(i) Recipient means any State or political subdivision thereof, or any instrumentality of a State or political subdivision thereof, any public or private agency, institution, or organization, or other entity, or any person, to whom Federal financial assistance is extended directly or through another recipient and which operates an education program or activity which receives such assistance, including any subunit, successor, assignee, or transferee thereof.
(j) Applicant means one who submits an application, request, or plan required to be approved by a Department official, or by a recipient, as a condition to becoming a recipient.
(k) Educational institution means a local educational agency (LEA) as defined by section 1001(f) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 3381), a preschool, a private elementary or secondary school, or an applicant or recipient of the type defined by paragraph (l), (m), (n), or (o) of this section.
(1) Offers academic study beyond the bachelor of arts or bachelor of science degree, whether or not leading to a certificate of any higher degree in the liberal arts and sciences; or
(2) Awards any degree in a professional field beyond the first professional degree (regardless of whether the first professional degree in such field is awarded by an institution of undergraduate higher education or professional education); or
(3) Awards no degree and offers no further academic study, but operates ordinarily for the purpose of facilitating research by persons who have received the highest graduate degree in any field of study.
(1) An institution offering at least two but less than four years of college level study beyond the high school level, leading to a diploma or an associate degree, or wholly or principally creditable toward a baccalaureate degree; or
(3) An agency or body which certifies credentials or offers degrees, but which may or may not offer academic study.
(n) Institution of professional education means an institution (except any institution of undergraduate higher education) which offers a program of academic study that leads to a first professional degree in a field for which there is a national specialized accrediting agency recognized by the Secretary.
(o) Institution of vocational education means a school or institution (except an institution of professional or graduate or undergraduate higher education) which has as its primary purpose preparation of students to pursue a technical, skilled, or semiskilled occupation or trade, or to pursue study in a technical field, whether or not the school or institution offers certificates, diplomas, or degrees and whether or not it offers fulltime study.
(p) Administratively separate unit means a school, department or college of an educational institution (other than a local educational agency) admission to which is independent of admission to any other component of such institution.
(q) Admission means selection for part-time, full-time, special, associate, transfer, exchange, or any other enrollment, membership, or matriculation in or at an education program or activity operated by a recipient.
(s) Transition plan means a plan subject to the approval of the Secretary pursuant to section 901(a)(2) of the Education Amendments of 1972, under which an educational institution operates in making the transition from being an educational institution which admits only students of one sex to being one which admits students of both sexes without discrimination.
(a) Remedial action. If the Assistant Secretary finds that a recipient has discriminated against persons on the basis of sex in an education program or activity, such recipient shall take such remedial action as the Assistant Secretary deems necessary to overcome the effects of such discrimination.
(b) Affirmative action. In the absence of a finding of discrimination on the basis of sex in an education program or activity, a recipient may take affirmative action to overcome the effects of conditions which resulted in limited participation therein by persons of a particular sex. Nothing herein shall be interpreted to alter any affirmative action obligations which a recipient may have under Executive Order 11246.
(c) Self-evaluation. Each recipient education institution shall, within one year of the effective date of this part:
(1) Evaluate, in terms of the requirements of this part, its current policies and practices and the effects thereof concerning admission of students, treatment of students, and employment of both academic and non-academic personnel working in connection with the recipient's education program or activity;
(3) Take appropriate remedial steps to eliminate the effects of any discrimination which resulted or may have resulted from adherence to these policies and practices.
(d) Availability of self-evaluation and related materials. Recipients shall maintain on file for at least three years following completion of the evaluation required under paragraph (c) of this section, and shall provide to the Assistant Secretary upon request, a description of any modifications made pursuant to paragraph (c)(ii) of this section and of any remedial steps taken pursuant to paragraph (c)(iii) of this section.
(a) General. Every application for Federal financial assistance shall as condition of its approval contain or be accompanied by an assurance from the applicant or recipient, satisfactory to the Assistant Secretary, that the education program or activity operated by the applicant or recipient and to which this part applies will be operated in compliance with this part. An assurance of compliance with this part shall not be satisfactory to the Assistant Secretary if the applicant or recipient to whom such assurance applies fails to commit itself to take whatever remedial action is necessary in accordance with §106.3(a) to eliminate existing discrimination on the basis of sex or to eliminate the effects of past discrimination whether occurring prior or subsequent to the submission to the Assistant Secretary of such assurance.
(b) Duration of obligation. (1) In the case of Federal financial assistance extended to provide real property or structures thereon, such assurance shall obligate the recipient or, in the case of a subsequent transfer, the transferee, for the period during which the real property or structures are used to provide an education program or activity.
(2) In the case of Federal financial assistance extended to provide personal property, such assurance shall obligate the recipient for the period during which it retains ownership or possession of the property.
(3) In all other cases such assurance shall obligate the recipient for the period during which Federal financial assistance is extended.
(c) Form. The Director will specify the form of the assurances required by paragraph (a) of this section and the extent to which such assurances will be required of the applicant's or recipient's subgrantees, contractors, subcontractors, transferees, or successors in interest.
If a recipient sells or otherwise transfers property financed in whole or in part with Federal financial assistance to a transferee which operates any education program or activity, and the Federal share of the fair market value of the property is not upon such sale or transfer properly accounted for to the Federal Government both the transferor and the transferee shall be deemed to be recipients, subject to the provisions of subpart B of this part.
(a) Effect of other Federal provisions. The obligations imposed by this part are independent of, and do not alter, obligations not to discriminate on the basis of sex imposed by Executive Order 11246, as amended; sections 704 and 855 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 292d and 298b–2); Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.); the Equal Pay Act (29 U.S.C. 206 and 206(d)); and any other Act of Congress or Federal regulation.
(Authority: Secs. 901, 902, 905, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374, 375; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682, 1685)
(b) Effect of State or local law or other requirements. The obligation to comply with this part is not obviated or alleviated by any State or local law or other requirement which would render any applicant or student ineligible, or limit the eligibility of any applicant or student, on the basis of sex, to practice any occupation or profession.
(c) Effect of rules or regulations of private organizations. The obligation to comply with this part is not obviated or alleviated by any rule or regulation of any organization, club, athletic or other league, or association which would render any applicant or student ineligible to participate or limit the eligibility or participation of any applicant or student, on the basis of sex, in any education program or activity operated by a recipient and which receives Federal financial assistance.
The obligation to comply with this part is not obviated or alleviated because employment opportunities in any occupation or profession are or may be more limited for members of one sex than for members of the other sex.
(a) Designation of responsible employee. Each recipient shall designate at least one employee to coordinate its efforts to comply with and carry out its responsibilities under this part, including any investigation of any complaint communicated to such recipient alleging its noncompliance with this part or alleging any actions which would be prohibited by this part. The recipient shall notify all its students and employees of the name, office address and telephone number of the employee or employees appointed pursuant to this paragraph.
(b) Complaint procedure of recipient. A recipient shall adopt and publish grievance procedures providing for prompt and equitable resolution of student and employee complaints alleging any action which would be prohibited by this part.
(a) Notification of policy. (1) Each recipient shall implement specific and continuing steps to notify applicants for admission and employment, students and parents of elementary and secondary school students, employees, sources of referral of applicants for admission and employment, and all unions or professional organizations holding collective bargaining or professional agreements with the recipient, that it does not discriminate on the basis of sex in the educational program or activity which it operates, and that it is required by title IX and this part not to discriminate in such a manner. Such notification shall contain such information, and be made in such manner, as the Assistant Secretary finds necessary to apprise such persons of the protections against discrimination assured them by title IX and this part, but shall state at least that the requirement not to discriminate in the education program or activity extends to employment therein, and to admission thereto unless Subpart C does not apply to the recipient, and that inquiries concerning the application of title IX and this part to such recipient may be referred to the employee designated pursuant to §106.8, or to the Assistant Secretary.
(2) Each recipient shall make the initial notification required by paragraph (a)(1) of this section within 90 days of the effective date of this part or of the date this part first applies to such recipient, whichever comes later, which notification shall include publication in:
(ii) Newspapers and magazines operated by such recipient or by student, alumnae, or alumni groups for or in connection with such recipient; and
(b) Publications. (1) Each recipient shall prominently include a statement of the policy described in paragraph (a) of this section in each announcement, bulletin, catalog, or application form which it makes available to any person of a type, described in paragraph (a) of this section, or which is otherwise used in connection with the recruitment of students or employees.
(2) A recipient shall not use or distribute a publication of the type described in this paragraph which suggests, by text or illustration, that such recipient treats applicants, students, or employees differently on the basis of sex except as such treatment is permitted by this part.
(c) Distribution. Each recipient shall distribute without discrimination on the basis of sex each publication described in paragraph (b) of this section, and shall apprise each of its admission and employment recruitment representatives of the policy of nondiscrimination described in paragraph (a) of this section, and require such representatives to adhere to such policy.
Except as provided in this subpart, this part 106 applies to every recipient and to the education program or activity operated by such recipient which receives Federal financial assistance.
(a) Application. This part does not apply to an educational institution which is controlled by a religious organization to the extent application of this part would not be consistent with the religious tenets of such organization.
(b) Exemption. An educational institution which wishes to claim the exemption set forth in paragraph (a) of this section, shall do so by submitting in writing to the Assistant Secretary a statement by the highest ranking official of the institution, identifying the provisions of this part which conflict with a specific tenet of the religious organization.
This part does not apply to an educational institution whose primary purpose is the training of individuals for a military service of the United States or for the merchant marine.
(a) Social fraternities and sororities. This part does not apply to the membership practices of social fraternities and sororities which are exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, the active membership of which consists primarily of students in attendance at institutions of higher education.
(b) YMCA, YWCA, Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts and Camp Fire Girls. This part does not apply to the membership practices of the Young Men's Christian Association, the Young Women's Christian Association, the Girl Scouts, the Boy Scouts and Camp Fire Girls.
(c) Voluntary youth service organizations. This part does not apply to the membership practices of voluntary youth service organizations which are exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 and the membership of which has been traditionally limited to members of one sex and principally to persons of less than nineteen years of age.
(Authority: Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682; sec. 3(a) of P.L. 93–568, 88 Stat. 1862 amending Sec. 901)
(b) Administratively separate units. For the purposes only of this section, §§106.16 and 106.17, and subpart C, each administratively separate unit shall be deemed to be an educational institution.
(c) Application of subpart C. Except as provided in paragraphs (d) and (e) of this section, subpart C applies to each recipient. A recipient to which subpart C applies shall not discriminate on the basis of sex in admission or recruitment in violation of that subpart.
(d) Educational institutions. Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section as to recipients which are educational institutions, subpart C applies only to institutions of vocational education, professional education, graduate higher education, and public institutions of undergraduate higher education.
(e) Public institutions of undergraduate higher education. Subpart C does not apply to any public institution of undergraduate higher education which traditionally and continually from its establishment has had a policy of admitting only students of one sex.
(2) Admitted only students of one sex as regular students as of June 23, 1965, but thereafter admitted as regular students, students of the sex not admitted prior to June 23, 1965.
(b) Provision for transition plans. An educational institution to which this section applies shall not discriminate on the basis of sex in admission or recruitment in violation of subpart C unless it is carrying out a transition plan approved by the Secretary as described in §106.17, which plan provides for the elimination of such discrimination by the earliest practicable date but in no event later than June 23, 1979.
(a) Submission of plans. An institution to which §106.16 applies and which is composed of more than one administratively separate unit may submit either a single transition plan applicable to all such units, or a separate transition plan applicable to each such unit.
(1) State the name, address, and Federal Interagency Committee on Education (FICE) Code of the educational institution submitting such plan, the administratively separate units to which the plan is applicable, and the name, address, and telephone number of the person to whom questions concerning the plan may be addressed. The person who submits the plan shall be the chief administrator or president of the institution, or another individual legally authorized to bind the institution to all actions set forth in the plan.
(2) State whether the educational institution or administratively separate unit admits students of both sexes, as regular students and, if so, when it began to do so.
(3) Identify and describe with respect to the educational institution or administratively separate unit any obstacles to admitting students without discrimination on the basis of sex.
(4) Describe in detail the steps necessary to eliminate as soon as practicable each obstacle so identified and indicate the schedule for taking these steps and the individual directly responsible for their implementation.
(5) Include estimates of the number of students, by sex, expected to apply for, be admitted to, and enter each class during the period covered by the plan.
(c) Nondiscrimination. No policy or practice of a recipient to which §106.16 applies shall result in treatment of applicants to or students of such recipient in violation of subpart C unless such treatment is necessitated by an obstacle identified in paragraph (b) (3) of this section and a schedule for eliminating that obstacle has been provided as required by paragraph (b) (4) of this section.
(d) Effects of past exclusion. To overcome the effects of past exclusion of students on the basis of sex, each educational institution to which §106.16 applies shall include in its transition plan, and shall implement, specific steps designed to encourage individuals of the previously excluded sex to apply for admission to such institution. Such steps shall include instituting recruitment which emphasizes the institution's commitment to enrolling students of the sex previously excluded.
(a) General. No person shall, on the basis of sex, be denied admission, or be subjected to discrimination in admission, by any recipient to which this subpart applies, except as provided in §§106.16 and 106.17.
(b) Specific prohibitions. (1) In determining whether a person satisfies any policy or criterion for admission, or in making any offer of admission, a recipient to which this subpart applies shall not:
(i) Give preference to one person over another on the basis of sex, by ranking applicants separately on such basis, or otherwise;
(ii) Apply numerical limitations upon the number or proportion of persons of either sex who may be admitted; or
(2) A recipient shall not administer or operate any test or other criterion for admission which has a disproportionately adverse effect on persons on the basis of sex unless the use of such test or criterion is shown to predict validly success in the education program or activity in question and alternative tests or criteria which do not have such a disproportionately adverse effect are shown to be unavailable.
(c) Prohibitions relating to marital or parental status. In determining whether a person satisfies any policy or criterion for admission, or in making any offer of admission, a recipient to which this subpart applies:
(1) Shall not apply any rule concerning the actual or potential parental, family, or marital status of a student or applicant which treats persons differently on the basis of sex;
(2) Shall not discriminate against or exclude any person on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth, termination of pregnancy, or recovery therefrom, or establish or follow any rule or practice which so discriminates or excludes;
(3) Shall treat disabilities related to pregnancy, childbirth, termination of pregnancy, or recovery therefrom in the same manner and under the same policies as any other temporary disability or physical condition; and
(4) Shall not make pre-admission inquiry as to the marital status of an applicant for admission, including whether such applicant is “Miss” or “Mrs.” A recipient may make pre-admission inquiry as to the sex of an applicant for admision, but only if such inquiry is made equally of such applicants of both sexes and if the results of such inquiry are not used in connection with discrimination prohibited by this part.
A recipient to which this subpart applies shall not give preference to applicants for admission, on the basis of attendance at any educational institution or other school or entity which admits as students only or predominantly members of one sex, if the giving of such preference has the effect of discriminating on the basis of sex in violation of this subpart.
(a) Nondiscriminatory recruitment. A recipient to which this subpart applies shall not discriminate on the basis of sex in the recruitment and admission of students. A recipient may be required to undertake additional recruitment efforts for one sex as remedial action pursuant to §106.3(a), and may choose to undertake such efforts as affirmative action pursuant to §106.3(b).
(b) Recruitment at certain institutions. A recipient to which this subpart applies shall not recruit primarily or exclusively at educational institutions, schools or entities which admit as students only or predominantly members of one sex, if such actions have the effect of discriminating on the basis of sex in violation of this subpart.
(a) General. Except as provided elsewhere in this part, no person shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any academic, extracurricular, research, occupational training, or other education program or activity operated by a recipient which receives Federal financial assistance. This subpart does not apply to actions of a recipient in connection with admission of its students to an education program or activity of (1) a recipient to which subpart C does not apply, or (2) an entity, not a recipient, to which subpart C would not apply if the entity were a recipient.
(b) Specific prohibitions. Except as provided in this subpart, in providing any aid, benefit, or service to a student, a recipient shall not, on the basis of sex:
(1) Treat one person differently from another in determining whether such person satisfies any requirement or condition for the provision of such aid, benefit, or service;
(5) Apply any rule concerning the domicile or residence of a student or applicant, including eligibility for in-state fees and tuition;
(6) Aid or perpetuate discrimination against any person by providing significant assistance to any agency, organization, or person which discriminates on the basis of sex in providing any aid, benefit or service to students or employees;
(c) Assistance administered by a recipient educational institution to study at a foreign institution. A recipient educational institution may administer or assist in the administration of scholarships, fellowships, or other awards established by foreign or domestic wills, trusts, or similar legal instruments, or by acts of foreign governments and restricted to members of one sex, which are designed to provide opportunities to study abroad, and which are awarded to students who are already matriculating at or who are graduates of the recipient institution; Provided, a recipient educational institution which administers or assists in the administration of such scholarships, fellowships, or other awards which are restricted to members of one sex provides, or otherwise makes available reasonable opportunities for similar studies for members of the other sex. Such opportunities may be derived from either domestic or foreign sources.
(d) Aid, benefits or services not provided by recipient. (1) This paragraph applies to any recipient which requires participation by any applicant, student, or employee in any education program or activity not operated wholly by such recipient, or which facilitates, permits, or considers such participation as part of or equivalent to an education program or activity operated by such recipient, including participation in educational consortia and cooperative employment and student-teaching assignments.
(i) Shall develop and implement a procedure designed to assure itself that the operator or sponsor of such other education program or activity takes no action affecting any applicant, student, or employee of such recipient which this part would prohibit such recipient from taking; and
(a) Generally. A recipient shall not, on the basis of sex, apply different rules or regulations, impose different fees or requirements, or offer different services or benefits related to housing, except as provided in this section (including housing provided only to married students).
(2) Housing provided by a recipient to students of one sex, when compared to that provided to students of the other sex, shall be as a whole:
(c) Other housing. (1) A recipient shall not, on the basis of sex, administer different policies or practices concerning occupancy by its students of housing other than provided by such recipient.
(2) A recipient which, through solicitation, listing, approval of housing, or otherwise, assists any agency, organization, or person in making housing available to any of its students, shall take such reasonable action as may be necessary to assure itself that such housing as is provided to students of one sex, when compared to that provided to students of the other sex, is as a whole:
A recipient may render such assistance to any agency, organization, or person which provides all or part of such housing to students only of one sex.
(Authority: Secs. 901, 902, 907, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374, 375; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682, 1686)
A recipient may provide separate toilet, locker room, and shower facilities on the basis of sex, but such facilities provided for students of one sex shall be comparable to such facilities provided for students of the other sex.
(a) General standard. Except as provided for in this section or otherwise in this part, a recipient shall not provide or otherwise carry out any of its education programs or activities separately on the basis of sex, or require or refuse participation therein by any of its students on the basis of sex.
(1) Contact sports in physical education classes. This section does not prohibit separation of students by sex within physical education classes or activities during participation in wrestling, boxing, rugby, ice hockey, football, basketball, and other sports the purpose or major activity of which involves bodily contact.
(2) Ability grouping in physical education classes. This section does not prohibit grouping of students in physical education classes and activities by ability as assessed by objective standards of individual performance developed and applied without regard to sex.
(3) Human sexuality classes. Classes or portions of classes in elementary and secondary schools that deal primarily with human sexuality may be conducted in separate sessions for boys and girls.
(4) Choruses. Recipients may make requirements based on vocal range or quality that may result in a chorus or choruses of one or predominantly one sex.
(b) Classes and extracurricular activities. (1) General standard. Subject to the requirements in this paragraph, a recipient that operates a nonvocational coeducational elementary or secondary school may provide nonvocational single-sex classes or extracurricular activities, if—
(A) To improve educational achievement of its students, through a recipient's overall established policy to provide diverse educational opportunities, provided that the single-sex nature of the class or extracurricular activity is substantially related to achieving that objective; or
(B) To meet the particular, identified educational needs of its students, provided that the single-sex nature of the class or extracurricular activity is substantially related to achieving that objective;
(iv) The recipient provides to all other students, including students of the excluded sex, a substantially equal coeducational class or extracurricular activity in the same subject or activity.
(2) Single-sex class or extracurricular activity for the excluded sex. A recipient that provides a single-sex class or extracurricular activity, in order to comply with paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this section, may be required to provide a substantially equal single-sex class or extracurricular activity for students of the excluded sex.
(3) Substantially equal factors. Factors the Department will consider, either individually or in the aggregate as appropriate, in determining whether classes or extracurricular activities are substantially equal include, but are not limited to, the following: the policies and criteria of admission, the educational benefits provided, including the quality, range, and content of curriculum and other services and the quality and availability of books, instructional materials, and technology, the qualifications of faculty and staff, geographic accessibility, the quality, accessibility, and availability of facilities and resources provided to the class, and intangible features, such as reputation of faculty.
(4) Periodic evaluations. (i) The recipient must conduct periodic evaluations to ensure that single-sex classes or extracurricular activities are based upon genuine justifications and do not rely on overly broad generalizations about the different talents, capacities, or preferences of either sex and that any single-sex classes or extracurricular activities are substantially related to the achievement of the important objective for the classes or extracurricular activities.
(ii) Evaluations for the purposes of paragraph (b)(4)(i) of this section must be conducted at least every two years.
(5) Scope of coverage. The provisions of paragraph (b)(1) through (4) of this section apply to classes and extracurricular activities provided by a recipient directly or through another entity, but the provisions of paragraph (b)(1) through (4) of this section do not apply to interscholastic, club, or intramural athletics, which are subject to the provisions of §§106.41 and 106.37(c) of this part.
(c) Schools. (1) General Standard. Except as provided in paragraph (c)(2) of this section, a recipient that operates a public nonvocational elementary or secondary school that excludes from admission any students, on the basis of sex, must provide students of the excluded sex a substantially equal single-sex school or coeducational school.
(2) Exception. A nonvocational public charter school that is a single-school local educational agency under State law may be operated as a single-sex charter school without regard to the requirements in paragraph (c)(1) of this section.
(3) Substantially equal factors. Factors the Department will consider, either individually or in the aggregate as appropriate, in determining whether schools are substantially equal include, but are not limited to, the following: The policies and criteria of admission, the educational benefits provided, including the quality, range, and content of curriculum and other services and the quality and availability of books, instructional materials, and technology, the quality and range of extracurricular offerings, the qualifications of faculty and staff, geographic accessibility, the quality, accessibility, and availability of facilities and resources, and intangible features, such as reputation of faculty.
(4) Definition. For the purposes of paragraph (c)(1) through (3) of this section, the term “school” includes a “school within a school,” which means an administratively separate school located within another school.
A recipient shall not, on the basis of sex, exclude any person from admission to any institution of vocational education operated by that recipient.
(a) Counseling. A recipient shall not discriminate against any person on the basis of sex in the counseling or guidance of students or applicants for admission.
(b) Use of appraisal and counseling materials. A recipient which uses testing or other materials for appraising or counseling students shall not use different materials for students on the basis of their sex or use materials which permit or require different treatment of students on such basis unless such different materials cover the same occupations and interest areas and the use of such different materials is shown to be essential to eliminate sex bias. Recipients shall develop and use internal procedures for ensuring that such materials do not discriminate on the basis of sex. Where the use of a counseling test or other instrument results in a substantially disproportionate number of members of one sex in any particular course of study or classification, the recipient shall take such action as is necessary to assure itself that such disproportion is not the result of discrimination in the instrument or its application.
(c) Disproportion in classes. Where a recipient finds that a particular class contains a substantially disproportionate number of individuals of one sex, the recipient shall take such action as is necessary to assure itself that such disproportion is not the result of discrimination on the basis of sex in counseling or appraisal materials or by counselors.
(a) General. Except as provided in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, in providing financial assistance to any of its students, a recipient shall not:
(1) On the basis of sex, provide different amount or types of such assistance, limit eligibility for such assistance which is of any particular type or source, apply different criteria, or otherwise discriminate;
(2) Through solicitation, listing, approval, provision of facilities or other services, assist any foundation, trust, agency, organization, or person which provides assistance to any of such recipient's students in a manner which discriminates on the basis of sex; or
(3) Apply any rule or assist in application of any rule concerning eligibility for such assistance which treats persons of one sex differently from persons of the other sex with regard to marital or parental status.
(b) Financial aid established by certain legal instruments. (1) A recipient may administer or assist in the administration of scholarships, fellowships, or other forms of financial assistance established pursuant to domestic or foreign wills, trusts, bequests, or similar legal instruments or by acts of a foreign government which requires that awards be made to members of a particular sex specified therein; Provided, That the overall effect of the award of such sex-restricted scholarships, fellowships, and other forms of financial assistance does not discriminate on the basis of sex.
(2) To ensure nondiscriminatory awards of assistance as required in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, recipients shall develop and use procedures under which:
(i) Students are selected for award of financial assistance on the basis of nondiscriminatory criteria and not on the basis of availability of funds restricted to members of a particular sex;
(ii) An appropriate sex-restricted scholarship, fellowship, or other form of financial assistance is allocated to each student selected under paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section; and
(iii) No student is denied the award for which he or she was selected under paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section because of the absence of a scholarship, fellowship, or other form of financial assistance designated for a member of that student's sex.
(c) Athletic scholarships. (1) To the extent that a recipient awards athletic scholarships or grants-in-aid, it must provide reasonable opportunities for such awards for members of each sex in proportion to the number of students of each sex participating in interscholastic or intercollegiate athletics.
(2) Separate athletic scholarships or grants-in-aid for members of each sex may be provided as part of separate athletic teams for members of each sex to the extent consistent with this paragraph and §106.41.
(Authority: Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682; and Sec. 844, Education Amendments of 1974, Pub. L. 93–380, 88 Stat. 484)
(a) Assistance by recipient in making available outside employment. A recipient which assists any agency, organization or person in making employment available to any of its students:
(2) Shall not render such services to any agency, organization, or person which discriminates on the basis of sex in its employment practices.
(b) Employment of students by recipients. A recipient which employs any of its students shall not do so in a manner which violates subpart E of this part.
In providing a medical, hospital, accident, or life insurance benefit, service, policy, or plan to any of its students, a recipient shall not discriminate on the basis of sex, or provide such benefit, service, policy, or plan in a manner which would violate Subpart E of this part if it were provided to employees of the recipient. This section shall not prohibit a recipient from providing any benefit or service which may be used by a different proportion of students of one sex than of the other, including family planning services. However, any recipient which provides full coverage health service shall provide gynecological care.
(a) Status generally. A recipient shall not apply any rule concerning a student's actual or potential parental, family, or marital status which treats students differently on the basis of sex.
(b) Pregnancy and related conditions. (1) A recipient shall not discriminate against any student, or exclude any student from its education program or activity, including any class or extracurricular activity, on the basis of such student's pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy or recovery therefrom, unless the student requests voluntarily to participate in a separate portion of the program or activity of the recipient.
(2) A recipient may require such a student to obtain the certification of a physician that the student is physically and emotionally able to continue participation so long as such a certification is required of all students for other physical or emotional conditions requiring the attention of a physician.
(3) A recipient which operates a portion of its education program or activity separately for pregnant students, admittance to which is completely voluntary on the part of the student as provided in paragraph (b)(1) of this section shall ensure that the separate portion is comparable to that offered to non-pregnant students.
(4) A recipient shall treat pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy and recovery therefrom in the same manner and under the same policies as any other temporary disability with respect to any medical or hospital benefit, service, plan or policy which such recipient administers, operates, offers, or participates in with respect to students admitted to the recipient's educational program or activity.
(5) In the case of a recipient which does not maintain a leave policy for its students, or in the case of a student who does not otherwise qualify for leave under such a policy, a recipient shall treat pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy and recovery therefrom as a justification for a leave of absence for so long a period of time as is deemed medically necessary by the student's physician, at the conclusion of which the student shall be reinstated to the status which she held when the leave began.
(a) General. No person shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, be treated differently from another person or otherwise be discriminated against in any interscholastic, intercollegiate, club or intramural athletics offered by a recipient, and no recipient shall provide any such athletics separately on such basis.
(b) Separate teams. Notwithstanding the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section, a recipient may operate or sponsor separate teams for members of each sex where selection for such teams is based upon competitive skill or the activity involved is a contact sport. However, where a recipient operates or sponsors a team in a particular sport for members of one sex but operates or sponsors no such team for members of the other sex, and athletic opportunities for members of that sex have previously been limited, members of the excluded sex must be allowed to try-out for the team offered unless the sport involved is a contact sport. For the purposes of this part, contact sports include boxing, wrestling, rugby, ice hockey, football, basketball and other sports the purpose or major activity of which involves bodily contact.
(c) Equal opportunity. A recipient which operates or sponsors interscholastic, intercollegiate, club or intramural athletics shall provide equal athletic opportunity for members of both sexes. In determining whether equal opportunities are available the Director will consider, among other factors:
(1) Whether the selection of sports and levels of competition effectively accommodate the interests and abilities of members of both sexes;
Unequal aggregate expenditures for members of each sex or unequal expenditures for male and female teams if a recipient operates or sponsors separate teams will not constitute noncompliance with this section, but the Assistant Secretary may consider the failure to provide necessary funds for teams for one sex in assessing equality of opportunity for members of each sex.
(d) Adjustment period. A recipient which operates or sponsors interscholastic, intercollegiate, club or intramural athletics at the elementary school level shall comply fully with this section as expeditiously as possible but in no event later than one year from the effective date of this regulation. A recipient which operates or sponsors interscholastic, intercollegiate, club or intramural athletics at the secondary or post-secondary school level shall comply fully with this section as expeditiously as possible but in no event later than three years from the effective date of this regulation.
(Authority: Secs. 901, 902, Education Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 373, 374; 20 U.S.C. 1681, 1682; and Sec. 844, Education Amendments of 1974, Pub. L. 93–380, 88 Stat. 484)
Nothing in this regulation shall be interpreted as requiring or prohibiting or abridging in any way the use of particular textbooks or curricular materials.
If use of a single standard of measuring skill or progress in physical education classes has an adverse effect on members of one sex, the recipient shall use appropriate standards that do not have that effect.
(a) General. (1) No person shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination in employment, or recruitment, consideration, or selection therefor, whether full-time or part-time, under any education program or activity operated by a recipient which receives Federal financial assistance.
(2) A recipient shall make all employment decisions in any education program or activity operated by such recipient in a nondiscriminatory manner and shall not limit, segregate, or classify applicants or employees in any way which could adversely affect any applicant's or employee's employment opportunities or status because of sex.
(3) A recipient shall not enter into any contractual or other relationship which directly or indirectly has the effect of subjecting employees or students to discrimination prohibited by this subpart, including relationships with employment and referral agencies, with labor unions, and with organizations providing or administering fringe benefits to employees of the recipient.
(4) A recipient shall not grant preferences to applicants for employment on the basis of attendance at any educational institution or entity which admits as students only or predominantly members of one sex, if the giving of such preferences has the effect of discriminating on the basis of sex in violation of this part.
(2) Hiring, upgrading, promotion, consideration for and award of tenure, demotion, transfer, layoff, termination, application of nepotism policies, right of return from layoff, and rehiring;
(4) Job assignments, classifications and structure, including position descriptions, lines of progression, and seniority lists;
(6) Granting and return from leaves of absence, leave for pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy, leave for persons of either sex to care for children or dependents, or any other leave;
(8) Selection and financial support for training, including apprenticeship, professional meetings, conferences, and other related activities, selection for tuition assistance, selection for sabbaticals and leaves of absence to pursue training;
A recipient shall not administer or operate any test or other criterion for any employment opportunity which has a disproportionately adverse effect on persons on the basis of sex unless:
(a) Use of such test or other criterion is shown to predict validly successful performance in the position in question; and
(b) Alternative tests or criteria for such purpose, which do not have such disproportionately adverse effect, are shown to be unavailable.
(a) Nondiscriminatory recruitment and hiring. A recipient shall not discriminate on the basis of sex in the recruitment and hiring of employees. Where a recipient has been found to be presently discriminating on the basis of sex in the recruitment or hiring of employees, or has been found to have in the past so discriminated, the recipient shall recruit members of the sex so discriminated against so as to overcome the effects of such past or present discrimination.
(b) Recruitment patterns. A recipient shall not recruit primarily or exclusively at entities which furnish as applicants only or predominantly members of one sex if such actions have the effect of discriminating on the basis of sex in violation of this subpart.
(b) Results in the payment of wages to employees of one sex at a rate less than that paid to employees of the opposite sex for equal work on jobs the performance of which requires equal skill, effort, and responsibility, and which are performed under similar working conditions.
(b) Maintain or establish separate lines of progression, seniority lists, career ladders, or tenure systems based on sex; or
(c) Maintain or establish separate lines of progression, seniority systems, career ladders, or tenure systems for similar jobs, position descriptions, or job requirements which classify persons on the basis of sex, unless sex is a bona-fide occupational qualification for the positions in question as set forth in §106.61.
(a) Fringe benefits defined. For purposes of this part, fringe benefits means: Any medical, hospital, accident, life insurance or retirement benefit, service, policy or plan, any profit-sharing or bonus plan, leave, and any other benefit or service of employment not subject to the provision of §106.54.
(1) Discriminate on the basis of sex with regard to making fringe benefits available to employees or make fringe benefits available to spouses, families, or dependents of employees differently upon the basis of the employee's sex;
(2) Administer, operate, offer, or participate in a fringe benefit plan which does not provide either for equal periodic benefits for members of each sex, or for equal contributions to the plan by such recipient for members of each sex; or
(3) Administer, operate, offer, or participate in a pension or retirement plan which establishes different optional or compulsory retirement ages based on sex or which otherwise discriminates in benefits on the basis of sex.
(1) Concerning the potential marital, parental, or family status of an employee or applicant for employment which treats persons differently on the basis of sex; or
(2) Which is based upon whether an employee or applicant for employment is the head of household or principal wage earner in such employee's or applicant's family unit.
(b) Pregnancy. A recipient shall not discriminate against or exclude from employment any employee or applicant for employment on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy, or recovery therefrom.
(c) Pregnancy as a temporary disability. A recipient shall treat pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy, and recovery therefrom and any temporary disability resulting therefrom as any other temporary disability for all job related purposes, including commencement, duration and extensions of leave, payment of disability income, accrual of seniority and any other benefit or service, and reinstatement, and under any fringe benefit offered to employees by virtue of employment.
(d) Pregnancy leave. In the case of a recipient which does not maintain a leave policy for its employees, or in the case of an employee with insufficient leave or accrued employment time to qualify for leave under such a policy, a recipient shall treat pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy and recovery therefrom as a justification for a leave of absence without pay for a reasonable period of time, at the conclusion of which the employee shall be reinstated to the status which she held when the leave began or to a comparable position, without decrease in rate of compensation or loss of promotional opportunities, or any other right or privilege of employment.
(a) Prohibitory requirements. The obligation to comply with this subpart is not obviated or alleviated by the existence of any State or local law or other requirement which imposes prohibitions or limits upon employment of members of one sex which are not imposed upon members of the other sex.
(b) Benefits. A recipient which provides any compensation, service, or benefit to members of one sex pursuant to a State or local law or other requirement shall provide the same compensation, service, or benefit to members of the other sex.
A recipient shall not in any advertising related to employment indicate preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination based on sex unless sex is a bona-fide occupational qualification for the particular job in question.
(a) Marital status. A recipient shall not make pre-employment inquiry as to the marital status of an applicant for employment, including whether such applicant is “Miss or Mrs.”
(b) Sex. A recipient may make pre-employment inquiry as to the sex of an applicant for employment, but only if such inquiry is made equally of such applicants of both sexes and if the results of such inquiry are not used in connection with discrimination prohibited by this part.
A recipient may take action otherwise prohibited by this subpart provided it is shown that sex is a bona-fide occupational qualification for that action, such that consideration of sex with regard to such action is essential to successful operation of the employment function concerned. A recipient shall not take action pursuant to this section which is based upon alleged comparative employment characteristics or stereotyped characterizations of one or the other sex, or upon preference based on sex of the recipient, employees, students, or other persons, but nothing contained in this section shall prevent a recipient from considering an employee's sex in relation to employment in a locker room or toilet facility used only by members of one sex.
The procedural provisions applicable to title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. These procedures may be found at 34 CFR 100.6–100.11 and 34 CFR, part 101.
Appendix A to Part 106—Guidelines for Eliminating Discrimination and Denial of Services on the Basis of Race, Color, National Origin, Sex, and Handicap in Vocational Education Programs
<>/Filter/FlateDecode/ID[<74E4DE3DF48D6749AC78BD44E2E98978>]/Index[132 106]/Info 131 0 R/Length 199/Prev 603942/Root 133 0 R/Size 238/Type/XRef/W[1 3 1]>>stream
<>/Metadata 19 0 R/Names 183 0 R/PageLayout/OneColumn/Pages 128 0 R/StructTreeRoot 33 0 R/Type/Catalog/ViewerPreferences<>>>
<</BitsPerComponent 8/ColorSpace/DeviceGray/DecodeParms<</BitsPerComponent 8/Colors 1/Columns 127>>/Filter/FlateDecode/Height 122/Length 1224/Name/X/Subtype/Image/Type/XObject/Width 127>>stream
<</BitsPerComponent 8/ColorSpace/DeviceRGB/Filter/DCTDecode/Height 122/Length 9311/Name/X/SMask 179 0 R/Subtype/Image/Type/XObject/Width 127>>stream
<</Contents 2 0 R/CropBox[0.0 0.0 612.0 792.0]/Group 236 0 R/MediaBox[0.0 0.0 612.0 792.0]/Parent 128 0 R/Resources<</ExtGState<</GS0 186 0 R>>/Font<</C2_0 26 0 R/TT0 227 0 R/TT1 27 0 R>>/ProcSet[/PDF/Text/ImageC]/XObject<</Im0 5 0 R>>>>/Rotate 0/StructParents 8/Tabs/S/Type/Page>>
<</BitsPerComponent 8/ColorSpace/DeviceGray/DecodeParms<</BitsPerComponent 8/Colors 1/Columns 127>>/Filter/FlateDecode/Height 122/Length 1224/Name/X/Subtype/Image/Type/XObject/Width 127>>stream
<</BitsPerComponent 8/ColorSpace/DeviceRGB/Filter/DCTDecode/Height 122/Length 10102/Name/X/SMask 4 0 R/Subtype/Image/Type/XObject/Width 127>>stream
<</Annots 24 0 R/Contents 8 0 R/CropBox[0.0 0.0 612.0 792.0]/Group 236 0 R/MediaBox[0.0 0.0 612.0 792.0]/Parent 128 0 R/Resources<</ExtGState<</GS0 186 0 R>>/Font<</C2_0 29 0 R/TT0 227 0 R/TT1 27 0 R>>/ProcSet[/PDF/Text/ImageC]/XObject<</Im0 11 0 R>>>>/Rotate 0/StructParents 9/Tabs/S/Type/Page>>
<</BitsPerComponent 8/ColorSpace/DeviceGray/DecodeParms<</BitsPerComponent 8/Colors 1/Columns 347>>/Filter/FlateDecode/Height 85/Length 54/Name/X/Subtype/Image/Type/XObject/Width 347>>stream
<</BitsPerComponent 8/ColorSpace/DeviceRGB/Filter/DCTDecode/Height 85/Length 6591/Name/X/SMask 10 0 R/Subtype/Image/Type/XObject/Width 347>>stream
<rdf:li xml:lang="x-default">Letter to Students, Educators, and Other Stakeholders Victims Rights Law Center et al. v. Cardona (PDF) </rdf:li>
<</DecodeParms<</Columns 5/Predictor 12>>/Filter/FlateDecode/ID[<F79E1895AAF52148BB7AB53BC10813FD><74E4DE3DF48D6749AC78BD44E2E98978>]/Info 131 0 R/Length 127/Root 133 0 R/Size 132/Type/XRef/W[1 3 1]>>stream
Since 1968, the U.S. Department of Education (ED) has conducted the Civil Rights Data Collection (CRDC) to collect data on key education and civil rights issues in our nation's public schools. The collection was formerly administered as the Elementary and Secondary School Survey.
The CRDC gathers a variety of information including student enrollment and student’s access to educational programs and services, most of which is disaggregated by race/ethnicity, sex, English learner, and disability. The CRDC is a longstanding and important aspect of the ED Office for Civil Rights (OCR) overall strategy for administering and enforcing the civil rights laws for which it is responsible. Information collected by the CRDC is also used by other ED offices as well as policymakers and researchers outside of ED.
On April 18, 2023, OCR received approval from the U.S. Office of Management and Budget to require all local educational agencies (LEA) in the country that receive federal financial assistance from ED, including every public school district, charter schools, juvenile justice facilities, alternative schools, and schools serving only students with disabilities, to respond to the CRDC for the 2021-22 and 2023-24 school years. OCR made changes to the CRDC, including, but not limited to the restoration of long-standing and useful data elements that have been collected in previous CRDCs as well as some new data elements. For more details about changes in the  2021-22 and 2023-24 CRDCs, please see 2021-22 Questions and Answers  PDF (183K) and 2023-24 Questions and Answers  PDF (181K). OCR will notify LEAs of the dates when they must submit data for the 2021-22 CRDC.
The 2021-22 CRDC school- and LEA-level survey forms contain instructions, definitions, and table layouts for the 2021-22 CRDC items.
Forum Guide to State Education Agency Support for LEAs in Civil Rights Data Reporting – This guide presents a variety of effective methods through which state education agencies (SEA) can support their LEAs in reporting civil rights data to OCR, and provides several detailed case studies from SEAs that currently support their LEAs with Civil Rights Data Collection reporting.
To access  additional technical assistance resources, please visit the CRDC Resource  Center web site at https://crdc.communities.ed.gov.
Data from the 2000, 2004,  2006, 2009-10, 2011-12, 2013-14, 2015-16, and 2017-18 CRDC surveys are available in the CRDC reporting tool.
The CRDCs for the 2020-21, 2017-18, 2015-16, 2013-14,  and 2011-12 school years collected data from every public school  and school district in the country that received federal financial assistance from ED. The 2009-10 CRDC collected data from a sample of approximately 7,000 public school districts and over 72,000 public schools.  Resources for the 2020-21, 2017-18, 2015-16, 2013-14, 2011-12, and 2009-10 CRDCs are presented below.
The CRDC data can be accessed at https://ocrdata.ed.gov. If anyone has concerns about the accuracy of the data reported, then please contact us by emailing ocrdata@ed.gov. Please include “CRDC Data Quality Concern” in the subject heading.
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
Non- Department of Education web sites linked by OCR contain information  			  related to the OCR mission and to civil rights. Non-U.S. Department  			  of Education web sites are linked as a public service only. The  			  Department of Education does not control or guarantee the accuracy,  			  relevance, timeliness, or completeness of this outside information.  			  Inclusion of links to particular resources is not intended to reflect  			  their relative importance, and is not intended as an endorsement  			  of the views expressed, the products or services offered on these  			  outside web sites, or of the organizations sponsoring the web sites.
Office of English Language Acquisition, Language Enhancement, and Academic Achievement for Limited English Proficient Students
The Kids.gov:   Official Kid’s Portal for the U.S. Government.  Find links to government and other kids’ sites.
The National Civil Rights Museum Virtual Tour: Civil rights movement from "Brown is Board of Education of Topeka" to current events such as "The Struggle continues". Information about civil rights heroes and heroines.
Gear Up: College information and resources to help low-income students enter and succeed in postsecondary education.
Jobs for Kids Who Like... This is a really cool page that lets you match your interests with possible careers. Sponsored by the Department of Labor.
Explorer’s Club: Lots of interesting things about recycling, plants and animals, air pollution, and the environment. Sponsored by the Environmental Protection Agency.
Ready.gov (Formerly FE-MA Kids): Floods, earthquakes, tornadoes, hurricanes, wild-fires...got your attention? Check out this site! Sponsored by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Forest Service Kids: The Forest Service is committed to connecting kids with nature and the outdoors by providing students, parents and teachers with youth-oriented information and resources related to natural resources and the environment.
Treasury’s Kids Zone: OK - here’s something we all want to know about: money! Find out about savings bonds, learn about how money is made, and even meet some of the dogs who help in drug enforcement. Sponsored by the Treasury Department.
Social Security Kids Stuff: You have heard of "social security" - right? This web site explains how it works. Sponsored by the Social Security Administration.
NASA’s Multimedia Gallery : This is a great collection of photos, videos, and information about our space program. Sponsored by NASA.
Links: You can ask a scientist or engineer your science questions...like how fast do butterflies fly? And how can you tell the age of a tree? Sponsored by the National Science Foundation.
Kids Page: Students  can learn about, Ocean Energy, Ocean’s Sand, and types of Energy and much more.  Sponsored by the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement.
FBI’s Kids Page (Kindergarten to 5th Grade: Find  			  out about fingerprints and lie detectors and DNA testing. Sponsored  			  by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
FBI's  			  Youth Page: Orientation for youth grades 6 to 12 to the  			  work of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Kids’ Page: Find out why laughing is good for you. Games and puzzles and information about environmental health. Don’t know what that is? Then visit this site! Sponsored by the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences.
Learning Web: Take an electronic field trip of Glacier National Park. See maps of the world. Monitor active volcanos. Sponsored by the U.S. Geological Survey.
Air Force Link Junior: Grab your security badge and meet Steve Canyon, Air Force hero! Or send a friend an Air Force post card. Sponsored by the U.S. Air Force.
Planet Youth: Meet Native American artists and learn about Native American customs. Sponsored by the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Just for Kids and Teachers: Visit  the Maritime Administration's Video Theater to see the Ready Reserve Force and America's Marine Transportation System in action and learn about the Adopt-A-Ship program sponsored by The Propeller Club of the United States. Sponsored by the Maritime Administration.
Kids’ Corner: Join the Polar Star ice breaker or read Snoopy’s safe boating tips. It’s all fun! Sponsored by the U.S. Coast Guard.
The National Zoo: Meet new zoo babies, play games, and see pictures of animals. Sponsored by the Smithsonian Institution.
Online Exhibit Hall: See the police plotter showing the assassination of President Abraham Lincoln. See pictures of some of the gifts that our Presidents have received. Sponsored by the National Archives and Records Administration.
Arts edge: You will have a great time looking at the art of students all over the world. Or you can read stories and visit lots of arts-related web sites. Sponsored by the Kennedy Center for Performing Arts.
Interesting Facts from NOAA: Do you know what to do if a storm approaches? Do you know what fish is the largest? Do you know what radiation is? You will learn all this, and more, at this site. Sponsored by the Department of Commerce.
Star Child: If you have ever wanted to be an astronaut, definitely check this out! You will learn about the solar system, the universe, and (ta-da!) space stuff. Sponsored by NASA.
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
Legislation, regulations, guidance, and other policy documents can be found here for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), and other topics.
Please note that in the U.S., the federal role in education is limited. Because of the Tenth Amendment, most education policy is decided at the state and local levels.  So, if you have a question about a policy or issue, you may want to check with the relevant organization in your state or school district.
Text of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, as amended through 12/27/22:  PDF (1.2M) |  Text (3.3M)
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
OCR enforces several Federal civil rights laws that prohibit discrimination in programs or activities that receive Federal funds from the Department of Education. These laws prohibit discrimination on the basis of race, color, and national origin, sex, disability, and on the basis of age. These laws extend to all state education agencies, elementary and secondary school systems, colleges and universities, vocational schools, proprietary schools, state vocational rehabilitation agencies, libraries, and museums that receive U.S. Department of Education funds. OCR also has responsibilities under Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (prohibiting disability discrimination by public entities, whether or not they receive federal financial assistance). In addition, as of January 8, 2002, OCR enforces the Boy Scouts of America Equal Access Act (Section 9525 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, as amended by the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001). Under the Boy Scouts of America Equal Access Act, no public elementary or secondary school or State or local education agency that provides an opportunity for one or more outside youth or community groups to meet on school premises or in school facilities shall deny equal access or a fair opportunity to meet to, or discriminate against, any group officially affiliated with the Boy Scouts of America, or any other youth group listed in Title 36 of the United States Code as a patriotic society, that wishes to meet at the school.
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
1. Privacy Policy SummaryThank you for visiting the U.S. Department of Education (ED) website and reviewing our privacy policy.  Our policy is simple: We collect no personal information about you unless you choose to provide that information to us. We do not give, share, sell, or transfer any personal information to a third party.
Some of our web pages (such as online publication order forms, conference and training registration forms, web discussion forums) let you voluntarily submit personal information.  In those cases, we will provide a specific notice before you begin submitting any personal information, explaining how your information will be safeguarded.
If you want to know more about how we record non-personal information about your visit or how we use information that you voluntarily submit, read on. TOP
2. Non-personal Information We RecordIf you do nothing during your visit but browse through the website, read pages, or download information, our website's operating system will automatically record some general information about your visit.
The Internet domain for your Internet service, such as "xcompany.com" or "xcompany.net" if you use a private Internet access account, or "yourschool.edu" if you connect from a college or university domain.
We use this information for statistical analysis, to help us make our site more useful to visitors. This tracking system does not record information about individuals. TOP
3. CookiesThe Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Memo M-10-22:  Guidance for Online Use of Web Measurement and Customization Technologies allows Federal Agencies to use sessions and persistent cookies.”
When you visit any website, its server may generate a piece of text known as a "cookie" to place on your computer. Placing cookie text allows websites to "remember" visitors' preferences, surfing patterns and behavior while they are connected.
The cookie makes it easier for you to use the dynamic features of Web pages. Cookies from ED.gov Web pages only collect information about your browser's visit to the site; they do not collect any personal information about you.
There are two types of cookies, single session (temporary), and multi-session (persistent). Session cookies last only as long as your Web browser is open. Once you close your browser, the cookie disappears. Persistent cookies are stored on your computer for longer periods.
Session Cookies: We use session cookies for technical purposes such as to enable better navigation through our site. These cookies let our server know that you are continuing a visit to our site. The OMB Memo 10-22 Guidance defines our use of session cookies as "Usage Tier 1-Single Session." The Guidance states, "This tier encompasses any use of single session web measurement and customization technologies."
Persistent Cookies: We use persistent cookies for two reasons: 1) to enable Google's Universal Analytics to differentiate between new and returning visitors to our site, and 2) to block repeated invitations to take the ACSI survey.
A Google's Universal Analytics (a third-party analytics provider) persistent cookie remains on your computer between visits to ED.gov for six months.  Knowing if a user visited ED.gov within the past six months tells us the difference between visitors and "unique visitors" or those who visit our website more than once during this time period).  This is an industry standard and provides high-level information on the breadth of traffic to and content usage of our given digital services.  It is a powerful, invaluable metric because it's the only measure that accurately calculates how many individual users visited ED.gov website in a given time. Combined with total visits, it tells a more comprehensive story about ED.gov users and their visit patterns.
We also use persistent cookies to block repeated invitations to take either the ACSI (American Customer Satisfaction Index) or iPerceptions survey. Based on your usage pattern, you may be asked if you would like to complete a customer survey of our website. The persistent cookie is set to block repeated survey invitations, and it expires in 90 days. Simply put, if you say you don't want to participate in the survey, the cookie will remember this, and will not allow you to be asked again. We feel it is important and respectful to our users not to ask them the same question more than once. The ACSI or iPerceptions survey are customer satisfaction survey tools used by multiple federal agencies and organizations in the private sector. We use these surveys so we can compare ED.gov results to other government agencies and top commercial websites. These surveys enables ED.gov to: measure program performance; identify targets of opportunity; efficiently leverage scarce resources; obtain valuable feedback from our users; focus management's attention on outcomes; and report customer satisfaction results.
The OMB Memo 10-22 Guidance defines our use of persistent cookies as "Usage Tier 2-Multi-session without Personally Identifiable Information (PII)." The Guidance states, "This tier encompasses any use of multi-session Web measurement and customization technologies when no PII is collected."
If you do not wish to have session or persistent cookies stored on your machine, you can opt out or disable cookies in your browser. You will still have access to all information and resources at Department websites. However, turning off cookies may affect the functioning of some Department websites. Be aware that disabling cookies in your browser will affect cookie usage at all other websites you visit as well.
ED.gov uses a third-party analytics provider (Google's Universal Analytics) to analyze the data collected through the session and persistent metrics cookies.  The third-party analytics provider does not receive personally identifiable information through these cookies and does not combine, match, or cross-reference ED.gov information with any other information.  Please review the third-party analytics provider's privacy policy for additional information.
Pursuant OMB Memo 10-22 Guidance Attachment III, V, these cookies collect information similar to that automatically received and stored on the servers hosting ED.gov; they do not collect personally identifiable information.  ED.gov does not access or store the raw information collected through these cookies.  We do view aggregate statistical analyses prepared by our third-party analytics provider, but these analyses do not include any personally identifiable information.  We do not sell, rent, exchange, or otherwise disclose this information to persons or organizations. TOP
4. Information from E-mail You Send to UsIf you decide to send us an electronic mail message (e-mail), the message will usually contain your return e-mail address.  If you include personally-identifying information in your e-mail because you want us to address issues specific to your situation, we may use that information in responding to your request. In other limited circumstances, including requests from Congress or limited other parties, we may be required by law to disclose information that you submit.
Also, e-mail is not necessarily secure against interception.  Please send only information necessary to help us process your request. TOP
5. Information Collected from Interactive FormsOn some of our web pages we offer interactive forms that let you voluntarily submit personal information (such as your e-mail address, name, or organization).  This occurs when you are registering for various conferences, workshops, or training sessions offered by ED, taking student aid counseling quizzes, ordering publications from ED Pubs, or submitting comments to various web discussion forums.  In those cases, all submitted information is used only for the expressed purposes for which it is intended and is not made available to any third party.  However, when you submit a comment to an ED web discussion forum, if you supply your name, e-mail address, or other personal information, that information is posted along with your comment. TOP
6. Links to Other SitesOur policy discloses the privacy practices for the ED website.  But ED provides links to other websites. When you leave the ED website (www.ed.gov), you will be going to sites that are beyond our control.  We try to ensure that links that leave our site are clearly labeled, usually with a  icon. These other sites may send their own cookies to users, collect data, or solicit personal information. The privacy policies and procedures described here for ED do not apply to any external links. We encourage you to read the privacy policies of any site you link to from ours, especially if you share any personal information.  Be informed.  You are the person best qualified to protect your own privacy. TOP
7. Social MediaED is using third-party social media sites to provide ED content in formats that may be useful or interesting; however, ED.gov is the official source of information from the U.S. Department of Education (ED).  ED cannot attest to the accuracy of other information provided by these or any other linked sites.  Using these third-party sites does not constitute an endorsement by ED or any of its employees of the sponsors of the sites or the information or products presented on the sites.  Also, please be aware that the privacy protection provided at ED.gov may not be available on these third-party sites.  Please note that when ED uses social media sites, ED does not collect or in any way use personally identifiable information. TOP
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
About Federal CourtsFederal Courts & the PublicVisit a Federal CourtCourt Website LinksFederal Court ScamsCourt Role and StructureComparing Federal & State CourtsAbout the U.S. Courts of AppealsTypes of CasesAppealsBankruptcy CasesCivil CasesCriminal CasesEducational ResourcesEducational ActivitiesSupreme Court LandmarksAnnual ObservancesAbout Educational OutreachGovernance & the Judicial ConferenceAbout the Judicial ConferenceCongressional Budget RequestJudicial AdministrationAdministrative Oversight and AccountabilityAudio Streaming PilotCameras in CourtsWorkplace ConductDirector of Workplace Relations Contacts by CircuitFact Sheet for Workplace Protections in the Federal JudiciaryBackground & ResourcesJudges & JudgeshipsAuthorized JudgeshipsJudgeship Appointments By PresidentChronological History of Authorized Judgeships - Courts of AppealsChronological History of Authorized Judgeships - District CourtsJudicial VacanciesCurrent Judicial VacanciesFuture Judicial VacanciesConfirmation ListingJudicial EmergenciesArchive of Judicial VacanciesJudicial MilestonesJudicial CompensationAbout Federal JudgesPathways to the Bench Video SeriesRoadways to the Bench: Who Me? A Bankruptcy or Magistrate Judge?Judiciary Financial Disclosure ReportsPrivately Funded Seminars DisclosureLog in & Create AccountOverviewStatement of PurposeInstructionsPolicyFrequently Asked QuestionsJudicial Conduct & DisabilityFAQs: Filing a Judicial Conduct or Disability Complaint Against a Federal JudgeJudicial Conduct and Disability OrdersArchives of the Committee on Judicial Conduct and DisabilityCode of Conduct for U.S. JudgesServices & FormsFormsAttorney FormsBankruptcy FormsSuperseded Bankruptcy FormsCivil FormsCriminal FormsCourt Reporter FormsCJA FormsHuman Resources FormsJury FormsOther FormsBankruptcyBankruptcy BasicsFiling Without an AttorneyCredit Counseling and Debtor EducationTrustees and AdministratorsBankruptcy NoticingUnclaimed Funds in BankruptcyJury ServiceSummoned for Federal Jury Service?Juror Selection ProcessTypes of JuriesJuror Qualifications, Exemptions and ExcusesJuror PayJuror ScamsFeesCourt of Appeals FeesDistrict Court FeesBankruptcy Court FeesElectronic Public Access FeesU.S. Court of Federal Claims FeesJudicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation FeesPost Judgment Interest RateFederal Court InterpretersInterpreter CategoriesFederal Court Interpreter Certification ExaminationInterpreter SkillsNational Court Interpreter Database (NCID) GatewayFederal Court Reporting ProgramProbation and Pretrial ServicesHistoryMissionOfficers and Officer AssistantsSupervisionData Release RegulationsDefender ServicesDefender Services MissionPublicationsBusiness OpportunitiesPre-Lapse in Appropriations Notice to ContractorsTransfer of Excess Judiciary Personal PropertyCourt RecordsFind a Case (PACER)Electronic Filing (CM/ECF)FAQs: CM/ECFCourt Records ScheduleElectronic Public Access Public User GroupStatistics & ReportsAnalysis & ReportsBAPCPA ReportCivil Justice Reform Act ReportFederal Court Management StatisticsFederal Judicial Caseload StatisticsJudicial Facts and FiguresJudicial BusinessStatistical Tables for the Federal JudiciaryWiretap ReportsDelayed-Notice Search WarrantFISA ReportDirector's Annual ReportBankruptcy Filings StatisticsCrime Victims’ Rights ReportData TablesPublicationsAsset Management Planning Process HandbookCivil Litigation Management ManualCourtroom TechnologyDodd Frank Act ReportFederal Court System in the U.S.Federal Probation JournalJournalist’s Guide to the Federal CourtsJudiciary Conferences That Cost More Than $100,000Long Range Plan for Information TechnologyLong Range Plan for the Federal CourtsStrategic Plan for Federal JudiciaryRules & PoliciesCurrent Rules of Practice & ProcedureFederal Rules of Civil ProcedureFederal Rules of Bankruptcy ProcedureAppellate Rules FormsPending Rules and Forms AmendmentsPending Changes in the Bankruptcy FormsProposed Amendments Published for Public CommentAbout the Rulemaking ProcessLaws and Procedures Governing the Work of the Rules CommitteesHow the Rulemaking Process WorksHow to Suggest a Change to Federal Court Rules and FormsHow to Submit Input on a Pending ProposalCommittee Membership SelectionOpen Meetings and Hearings of the Rules CommitteePermitted Changes to Official Bankruptcy FormsRecords of the Rules CommitteesAgenda BooksCommittee ReportsCongressional and Supreme Court Rules PackagesFJC Studies and Related PublicationsMeeting MinutesPast Members of the Rules CommitteesPreliminary Drafts of Proposed Rule AmendmentsRules CommentsRules SuggestionsSpecial Projects of the Rules CommitteesStyle ResourcesSuperseded Rules PamphletsTranscripts and TestimonyJudiciary PoliciesBankruptcy Case PoliciesCJA GuidelinesCourt Interpreting GuidanceCourt Reporting GuidanceEthics PoliciesWorkplace Conduct and ProtectionsFederal Tort ClaimsFraud, Waste, or Abuse PolicyGarnishment RegulationsJudiciary Staff Travel RegulationsPortable Communication DevicesPrivacy Policy for Electronic Case FilesProcurement PoliciesSubpoena RegulationsConfidentiality Regulations for Pretrial Services InformationProposed Changes to Code and JC&D RulesU.S. Courts Design Guide
The 14th Amendment provides, in part, that no state can "deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws." Title IX specifically prohibits sex discrimination.
Ratified in 1868, Congress and the courts have applied the 14th Amendment’s Equal Protection Clause to many aspects of public life over the past 150 years. Title IX is an example of how the 14th Amendment has been interpreted over time. Title IX, which is of particular interest to young people, prohibits institutions that receive federal funding from excluding students from participating in educational and athletic programs on the basis of sex.
Specifically, Title IX states that “No person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from the participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.”
Title IX of the Civil Rights Act was signed into law on June 23, 1972 by President Richard M. Nixon. However, Title IX began its journey through all three branches of government when Representative Patsy T. Mink, of Hawaii, who is recognized as the major author and sponsor of the legislation, introduced it in Congress. When she died in 2002, Title IX was renamed the Patsy Mink Equal Opportunity in Education Act. She was given the Medal of Freedom after her death.
One way to track the evolution of Title IX is to examine the Supreme Court’s 1984 decision in Grove City College v. Bell. As the high court’s first Title IX case, the issues that arose from the Act, demonstrate how each of the three branches exercises its authority. The case makes Title IX a study not only of the 14th Amendment but also of the impact of the push and pull of the separation of powers on law-abiding citizens.
The Legislative Branch. Congress enacted Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, which requires that no person be excluded from participation in, denied the benefits of, or subjected to discrimination on the basis of sex under “any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.” It authorizes any federal agency that provides such assistance to issue regulations to enforce the prohibition of sex discrimination. It also allows termination of financial assistance when an institution does not voluntarily comply.
The Executive Branch. In 1975, the United States Department of Health, Education and Welfare (which became the Department of Education and is referred to here as the Department) issued implementing regulations requiring every educational institution that receives federal financial assistance to file a document assuring its compliance with Title IX.
The Judicial Branch. The Supreme Court of the United States ruled in 1984 that Title IX’s non-discrimination and compliance requirements apply to any educational institution that receives federal financial assistance through grants provided directly to its students. At that time, the requirement applied only to the specific program or activity receiving federal assistance.  In this instance the program was student financial aid.
The Legislative Branch. In early 1988, the Senate and House of Representatives each responded to the Supreme Court decision by passing legislation (Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987) which clarifies that a “program or activity,” for purposes of Title IX and other civil rights laws, refers to “all operations” of an institution whenever federal financial assistance is extended to “any part” of the institution.
The Executive Branch. On March 16, 1988, President Reagan vetoed the legislation on grounds that it “vastly and unjustifiably expand[s] the power of the [f]ederal government over the decisions and affairs of private organizations.”
The Legislative Branch. On March 22, 1988, Congress overrode the President’s veto by passing again the legislation with the support of a two-thirds majority in the House and Senate. As a result, the Civil Rights Restoration Act became law.
To get started, review the glossary and prepare students to use it with the case materials to underline terms and concept they find in the readings.
Have students read the Grove City College v. Bell facts and case summary and make a list of their questions and arguments.
Have students use the Title IX timeline as a reference for drawing a Venn Diagram or double bubble map to list the impacts of each branch of government on the evolution of Title IX.
Use the separation of powers discussion questions to illuminate how the push and pull of the three branches of government shaped Title IX. Guide students’ understanding of how the separation of powers has an impact on the their daily life and the issues that matter to them.
Have students view the Ahead of the Majority video on Representative Patsy Mink, often called the Mother of Title IX. Next, have students select a Pathways to the Bench video profile of a federal judge whose story also deals with personal adversities that motivated them to be of service.
DISCLAIMER: These resources are created by the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts for educational purposes only. They may not reflect the current state of the law, and are not intended to provide legal advice, guidance on litigation, or commentary on any pending case or legislation.
The 14th Amendment and the Evolution of Title IX Grove City College v. Bell - Facts and Case Summary Grove City College v. Bell - Glossary Grove City College v. Bell - Discussion Questions
This site is maintained by the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts on behalf of the Federal Judiciary. The purpose of this site is to provide information from and about the Judicial Branch of the U.S. Government.
About Federal CourtsFederal Courts & the PublicVisit a Federal CourtCourt Website LinksFederal Court ScamsCourt Role and StructureComparing Federal & State CourtsAbout the U.S. Courts of AppealsTypes of CasesAppealsBankruptcy CasesCivil CasesCriminal CasesEducational ResourcesEducational ActivitiesSupreme Court LandmarksAnnual ObservancesAbout Educational OutreachGovernance & the Judicial ConferenceAbout the Judicial ConferenceCongressional Budget RequestJudicial AdministrationAdministrative Oversight and AccountabilityAudio Streaming PilotCameras in CourtsWorkplace ConductDirector of Workplace Relations Contacts by CircuitFact Sheet for Workplace Protections in the Federal JudiciaryBackground & ResourcesJudges & JudgeshipsAuthorized JudgeshipsJudgeship Appointments By PresidentChronological History of Authorized Judgeships - Courts of AppealsChronological History of Authorized Judgeships - District CourtsJudicial VacanciesCurrent Judicial VacanciesFuture Judicial VacanciesConfirmation ListingJudicial EmergenciesArchive of Judicial VacanciesJudicial MilestonesJudicial CompensationAbout Federal JudgesPathways to the Bench Video SeriesRoadways to the Bench: Who Me? A Bankruptcy or Magistrate Judge?Judiciary Financial Disclosure ReportsPrivately Funded Seminars DisclosureLog in & Create AccountOverviewStatement of PurposeInstructionsPolicyFrequently Asked QuestionsJudicial Conduct & DisabilityFAQs: Filing a Judicial Conduct or Disability Complaint Against a Federal JudgeJudicial Conduct and Disability OrdersArchives of the Committee on Judicial Conduct and DisabilityCode of Conduct for U.S. JudgesServices & FormsFormsAttorney FormsBankruptcy FormsSuperseded Bankruptcy FormsCivil FormsCriminal FormsCourt Reporter FormsCJA FormsHuman Resources FormsJury FormsOther FormsBankruptcyBankruptcy BasicsFiling Without an AttorneyCredit Counseling and Debtor EducationTrustees and AdministratorsBankruptcy NoticingUnclaimed Funds in BankruptcyJury ServiceSummoned for Federal Jury Service?Juror Selection ProcessTypes of JuriesJuror Qualifications, Exemptions and ExcusesJuror PayJuror ScamsFeesCourt of Appeals FeesDistrict Court FeesBankruptcy Court FeesElectronic Public Access FeesU.S. Court of Federal Claims FeesJudicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation FeesPost Judgment Interest RateFederal Court InterpretersInterpreter CategoriesFederal Court Interpreter Certification ExaminationInterpreter SkillsNational Court Interpreter Database (NCID) GatewayFederal Court Reporting ProgramProbation and Pretrial ServicesHistoryMissionOfficers and Officer AssistantsSupervisionData Release RegulationsDefender ServicesDefender Services MissionPublicationsBusiness OpportunitiesPre-Lapse in Appropriations Notice to ContractorsTransfer of Excess Judiciary Personal PropertyCourt RecordsFind a Case (PACER)Electronic Filing (CM/ECF)FAQs: CM/ECFCourt Records ScheduleElectronic Public Access Public User GroupStatistics & ReportsAnalysis & ReportsBAPCPA ReportCivil Justice Reform Act ReportFederal Court Management StatisticsFederal Judicial Caseload StatisticsJudicial Facts and FiguresJudicial BusinessStatistical Tables for the Federal JudiciaryWiretap ReportsDelayed-Notice Search WarrantFISA ReportDirector's Annual ReportBankruptcy Filings StatisticsCrime Victims’ Rights ReportData TablesPublicationsAsset Management Planning Process HandbookCivil Litigation Management ManualCourtroom TechnologyDodd Frank Act ReportFederal Court System in the U.S.Federal Probation JournalJournalist’s Guide to the Federal CourtsJudiciary Conferences That Cost More Than $100,000Long Range Plan for Information TechnologyLong Range Plan for the Federal CourtsStrategic Plan for Federal JudiciaryRules & PoliciesCurrent Rules of Practice & ProcedureFederal Rules of Civil ProcedureFederal Rules of Bankruptcy ProcedureAppellate Rules FormsPending Rules and Forms AmendmentsPending Changes in the Bankruptcy FormsProposed Amendments Published for Public CommentAbout the Rulemaking ProcessLaws and Procedures Governing the Work of the Rules CommitteesHow the Rulemaking Process WorksHow to Suggest a Change to Federal Court Rules and FormsHow to Submit Input on a Pending ProposalCommittee Membership SelectionOpen Meetings and Hearings of the Rules CommitteePermitted Changes to Official Bankruptcy FormsRecords of the Rules CommitteesAgenda BooksCommittee ReportsCongressional and Supreme Court Rules PackagesFJC Studies and Related PublicationsMeeting MinutesPast Members of the Rules CommitteesPreliminary Drafts of Proposed Rule AmendmentsRules CommentsRules SuggestionsSpecial Projects of the Rules CommitteesStyle ResourcesSuperseded Rules PamphletsTranscripts and TestimonyJudiciary PoliciesBankruptcy Case PoliciesCJA GuidelinesCourt Interpreting GuidanceCourt Reporting GuidanceEthics PoliciesWorkplace Conduct and ProtectionsFederal Tort ClaimsFraud, Waste, or Abuse PolicyGarnishment RegulationsJudiciary Staff Travel RegulationsPortable Communication DevicesPrivacy Policy for Electronic Case FilesProcurement PoliciesSubpoena RegulationsConfidentiality Regulations for Pretrial Services InformationProposed Changes to Code and JC&D RulesU.S. Courts Design Guide
The 14th Amendment provides, in part, that no state can "deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws." Title IX specifically prohibits sex discrimination.
Ratified in 1868, Congress and the courts have applied the 14th Amendment’s Equal Protection Clause to many aspects of public life over the past 150 years. Title IX is an example of how the 14th Amendment has been interpreted over time. Title IX, which is of particular interest to young people, prohibits institutions that receive federal funding from excluding students from participating in educational and athletic programs on the basis of sex.
Specifically, Title IX states that “No person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from the participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.”
Title IX of the Civil Rights Act was signed into law on June 23, 1972 by President Richard M. Nixon. However, Title IX began its journey through all three branches of government when Representative Patsy T. Mink, of Hawaii, who is recognized as the major author and sponsor of the legislation, introduced it in Congress. When she died in 2002, Title IX was renamed the Patsy Mink Equal Opportunity in Education Act. She was given the Medal of Freedom after her death.
One way to track the evolution of Title IX is to examine the Supreme Court’s 1984 decision in Grove City College v. Bell. As the high court’s first Title IX case, the issues that arose from the Act, demonstrate how each of the three branches exercises its authority. The case makes Title IX a study not only of the 14th Amendment but also of the impact of the push and pull of the separation of powers on law-abiding citizens.
The Legislative Branch. Congress enacted Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, which requires that no person be excluded from participation in, denied the benefits of, or subjected to discrimination on the basis of sex under “any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.” It authorizes any federal agency that provides such assistance to issue regulations to enforce the prohibition of sex discrimination. It also allows termination of financial assistance when an institution does not voluntarily comply.
The Executive Branch. In 1975, the United States Department of Health, Education and Welfare (which became the Department of Education and is referred to here as the Department) issued implementing regulations requiring every educational institution that receives federal financial assistance to file a document assuring its compliance with Title IX.
The Judicial Branch. The Supreme Court of the United States ruled in 1984 that Title IX’s non-discrimination and compliance requirements apply to any educational institution that receives federal financial assistance through grants provided directly to its students. At that time, the requirement applied only to the specific program or activity receiving federal assistance.  In this instance the program was student financial aid.
The Legislative Branch. In early 1988, the Senate and House of Representatives each responded to the Supreme Court decision by passing legislation (Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987) which clarifies that a “program or activity,” for purposes of Title IX and other civil rights laws, refers to “all operations” of an institution whenever federal financial assistance is extended to “any part” of the institution.
The Executive Branch. On March 16, 1988, President Reagan vetoed the legislation on grounds that it “vastly and unjustifiably expand[s] the power of the [f]ederal government over the decisions and affairs of private organizations.”
The Legislative Branch. On March 22, 1988, Congress overrode the President’s veto by passing again the legislation with the support of a two-thirds majority in the House and Senate. As a result, the Civil Rights Restoration Act became law.
To get started, review the glossary and prepare students to use it with the case materials to underline terms and concept they find in the readings.
Have students read the Grove City College v. Bell facts and case summary and make a list of their questions and arguments.
Have students use the Title IX timeline as a reference for drawing a Venn Diagram or double bubble map to list the impacts of each branch of government on the evolution of Title IX.
Use the separation of powers discussion questions to illuminate how the push and pull of the three branches of government shaped Title IX. Guide students’ understanding of how the separation of powers has an impact on the their daily life and the issues that matter to them.
Have students view the Ahead of the Majority video on Representative Patsy Mink, often called the Mother of Title IX. Next, have students select a Pathways to the Bench video profile of a federal judge whose story also deals with personal adversities that motivated them to be of service.
DISCLAIMER: These resources are created by the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts for educational purposes only. They may not reflect the current state of the law, and are not intended to provide legal advice, guidance on litigation, or commentary on any pending case or legislation.
The 14th Amendment and the Evolution of Title IX Grove City College v. Bell - Facts and Case Summary Grove City College v. Bell - Glossary Grove City College v. Bell - Discussion Questions
This site is maintained by the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts on behalf of the Federal Judiciary. The purpose of this site is to provide information from and about the Judicial Branch of the U.S. Government.
About Federal CourtsFederal Courts & the PublicVisit a Federal CourtCourt Website LinksFederal Court ScamsCourt Role and StructureComparing Federal & State CourtsAbout the U.S. Courts of AppealsTypes of CasesAppealsBankruptcy CasesCivil CasesCriminal CasesEducational ResourcesEducational ActivitiesSupreme Court LandmarksAnnual ObservancesAbout Educational OutreachGovernance & the Judicial ConferenceAbout the Judicial ConferenceCongressional Budget RequestJudicial AdministrationAdministrative Oversight and AccountabilityAudio Streaming PilotCameras in CourtsWorkplace ConductDirector of Workplace Relations Contacts by CircuitFact Sheet for Workplace Protections in the Federal JudiciaryBackground & ResourcesJudges & JudgeshipsAuthorized JudgeshipsJudgeship Appointments By PresidentChronological History of Authorized Judgeships - Courts of AppealsChronological History of Authorized Judgeships - District CourtsJudicial VacanciesCurrent Judicial VacanciesFuture Judicial VacanciesConfirmation ListingJudicial EmergenciesArchive of Judicial VacanciesJudicial MilestonesJudicial CompensationAbout Federal JudgesPathways to the Bench Video SeriesRoadways to the Bench: Who Me? A Bankruptcy or Magistrate Judge?Judiciary Financial Disclosure ReportsPrivately Funded Seminars DisclosureLog in & Create AccountOverviewStatement of PurposeInstructionsPolicyFrequently Asked QuestionsJudicial Conduct & DisabilityFAQs: Filing a Judicial Conduct or Disability Complaint Against a Federal JudgeJudicial Conduct and Disability OrdersArchives of the Committee on Judicial Conduct and DisabilityCode of Conduct for U.S. JudgesServices & FormsFormsAttorney FormsBankruptcy FormsSuperseded Bankruptcy FormsCivil FormsCriminal FormsCourt Reporter FormsCJA FormsHuman Resources FormsJury FormsOther FormsBankruptcyBankruptcy BasicsFiling Without an AttorneyCredit Counseling and Debtor EducationTrustees and AdministratorsBankruptcy NoticingUnclaimed Funds in BankruptcyJury ServiceSummoned for Federal Jury Service?Juror Selection ProcessTypes of JuriesJuror Qualifications, Exemptions and ExcusesJuror PayJuror ScamsFeesCourt of Appeals FeesDistrict Court FeesBankruptcy Court FeesElectronic Public Access FeesU.S. Court of Federal Claims FeesJudicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation FeesPost Judgment Interest RateFederal Court InterpretersInterpreter CategoriesFederal Court Interpreter Certification ExaminationInterpreter SkillsNational Court Interpreter Database (NCID) GatewayFederal Court Reporting ProgramProbation and Pretrial ServicesHistoryMissionOfficers and Officer AssistantsSupervisionData Release RegulationsDefender ServicesDefender Services MissionPublicationsBusiness OpportunitiesPre-Lapse in Appropriations Notice to ContractorsTransfer of Excess Judiciary Personal PropertyCourt RecordsFind a Case (PACER)Electronic Filing (CM/ECF)FAQs: CM/ECFCourt Records ScheduleElectronic Public Access Public User GroupStatistics & ReportsAnalysis & ReportsBAPCPA ReportCivil Justice Reform Act ReportFederal Court Management StatisticsFederal Judicial Caseload StatisticsJudicial Facts and FiguresJudicial BusinessStatistical Tables for the Federal JudiciaryWiretap ReportsDelayed-Notice Search WarrantFISA ReportDirector's Annual ReportBankruptcy Filings StatisticsCrime Victims’ Rights ReportData TablesPublicationsAsset Management Planning Process HandbookCivil Litigation Management ManualCourtroom TechnologyDodd Frank Act ReportFederal Court System in the U.S.Federal Probation JournalJournalist’s Guide to the Federal CourtsJudiciary Conferences That Cost More Than $100,000Long Range Plan for Information TechnologyLong Range Plan for the Federal CourtsStrategic Plan for Federal JudiciaryRules & PoliciesCurrent Rules of Practice & ProcedureFederal Rules of Civil ProcedureFederal Rules of Bankruptcy ProcedureAppellate Rules FormsPending Rules and Forms AmendmentsPending Changes in the Bankruptcy FormsProposed Amendments Published for Public CommentAbout the Rulemaking ProcessLaws and Procedures Governing the Work of the Rules CommitteesHow the Rulemaking Process WorksHow to Suggest a Change to Federal Court Rules and FormsHow to Submit Input on a Pending ProposalCommittee Membership SelectionOpen Meetings and Hearings of the Rules CommitteePermitted Changes to Official Bankruptcy FormsRecords of the Rules CommitteesAgenda BooksCommittee ReportsCongressional and Supreme Court Rules PackagesFJC Studies and Related PublicationsMeeting MinutesPast Members of the Rules CommitteesPreliminary Drafts of Proposed Rule AmendmentsRules CommentsRules SuggestionsSpecial Projects of the Rules CommitteesStyle ResourcesSuperseded Rules PamphletsTranscripts and TestimonyJudiciary PoliciesBankruptcy Case PoliciesCJA GuidelinesCourt Interpreting GuidanceCourt Reporting GuidanceEthics PoliciesWorkplace Conduct and ProtectionsFederal Tort ClaimsFraud, Waste, or Abuse PolicyGarnishment RegulationsJudiciary Staff Travel RegulationsPortable Communication DevicesPrivacy Policy for Electronic Case FilesProcurement PoliciesSubpoena RegulationsConfidentiality Regulations for Pretrial Services InformationProposed Changes to Code and JC&D RulesU.S. Courts Design Guide
1. A nongovernmental source1, other than a state or local bar association, a subject-matter bar association, a judicial association, the Judicial Division of the American Bar Association, or the National Judicial College, that wishes to pay for or reimburse federal judges’2 expenses (i.e., travel, food, lodging, or anything that would be considered a gift under the Judicial Conference Ethics Reform Act Gift Regulations)3 above the threshold at which judges must report reimbursements on their annual financial disclosure reports4 in connection with attending, as a speaker or participant, a program, a significant purpose of which is the education of United States federal or state judges, shall disclose to the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts in writing the following information:
The Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts shall develop a detailed form for this purpose. Upon receipt, the Administrative Office shall promptly post the information on the Judiciary’s website (https://www.uscourts.gov) so that it is publicly available and available to judges. The filing shall be retained for a period of three years from the date of filing.
2. A federal judge shall not accept travel, food, lodging, reimbursement, or anything that would be considered a gift under the Judicial Conference Ethics Reform Act Gift Regulations from a nongovernmental source other than a state or local bar association, a subject-matter bar association, a judicial association, the Judicial Division of the American Bar Association, or the National Judicial College, in connection with attending, as a speaker or participant, a program, a significant purpose of which is the education of United States federal or state judges, unless the judge:
within 30 days following the conclusion of the educational program, files a report in the office of the relevant clerk of court (court of appeals, district court, Court of International Trade, Court of Federal Claims, or bankruptcy court, as appropriate), disclosing the dates of attendance, the name of the program provider(s), and the title of the educational program. The Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts shall develop a form for this purpose. This filing shall be available on the local court’s website. The filing shall be retained for a period of three years from the date of filing.
3. This is a policy of the Judicial Conference. It is not intended to change the Code of Conduct for United States Judges (see in particular Advisory Opinion No. 67 of the Judicial Conference Committee on Codes of Conduct) or the annual financial disclosure reporting requirements for judges under the Ethics in Government Act, 5 U.S.C. app. §§ 101-111.
1. If the support, financial or otherwise, comes from the general revenues of the program provider(s), and/or from endowments or gifts not raised for the particular educational program or for the purpose of educating judges, then it is sufficient to identify the program provider(s) as the source of support.
2. If the support, financial or otherwise, comes in whole or in part from money, goods or services from others (e.g., corporations, nonprofit organizations, foundations, individual donors) specifically for the particular educational program, or for the education of judges generally, list every such donor. This policy is not intended to require the disclosure and reporting of monies derived from tuition, educational program registration fees, and other similar enrollment fees.
4Currently, a judge must report any reimbursement exceeding $415. This figure is subject 4 to change every three years in accordance with the cost of living as determined by the Administrator of General Services. See 5 U.S.C. § 7342(a)(5); 41 C.F.R. sec. 102-42; see also 5 U.S.C. app. § 102(a)(2)(B).
This site is maintained by the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts on behalf of the Federal Judiciary. The purpose of this site is to provide information from and about the Judicial Branch of the U.S. Government.
About Federal CourtsFederal Courts & the PublicVisit a Federal CourtCourt Website LinksFederal Court ScamsCourt Role and StructureComparing Federal & State CourtsAbout the U.S. Courts of AppealsTypes of CasesAppealsBankruptcy CasesCivil CasesCriminal CasesEducational ResourcesEducational ActivitiesSupreme Court LandmarksAnnual ObservancesAbout Educational OutreachGovernance & the Judicial ConferenceAbout the Judicial ConferenceCongressional Budget RequestJudicial AdministrationAdministrative Oversight and AccountabilityAudio Streaming PilotCameras in CourtsWorkplace ConductDirector of Workplace Relations Contacts by CircuitFact Sheet for Workplace Protections in the Federal JudiciaryBackground & ResourcesJudges & JudgeshipsAuthorized JudgeshipsJudgeship Appointments By PresidentChronological History of Authorized Judgeships - Courts of AppealsChronological History of Authorized Judgeships - District CourtsJudicial VacanciesCurrent Judicial VacanciesFuture Judicial VacanciesConfirmation ListingJudicial EmergenciesArchive of Judicial VacanciesJudicial MilestonesJudicial CompensationAbout Federal JudgesPathways to the Bench Video SeriesRoadways to the Bench: Who Me? A Bankruptcy or Magistrate Judge?Judiciary Financial Disclosure ReportsPrivately Funded Seminars DisclosureLog in & Create AccountOverviewStatement of PurposeInstructionsPolicyFrequently Asked QuestionsJudicial Conduct & DisabilityFAQs: Filing a Judicial Conduct or Disability Complaint Against a Federal JudgeJudicial Conduct and Disability OrdersArchives of the Committee on Judicial Conduct and DisabilityCode of Conduct for U.S. JudgesServices & FormsFormsAttorney FormsBankruptcy FormsSuperseded Bankruptcy FormsCivil FormsCriminal FormsCourt Reporter FormsCJA FormsHuman Resources FormsJury FormsOther FormsBankruptcyBankruptcy BasicsFiling Without an AttorneyCredit Counseling and Debtor EducationTrustees and AdministratorsBankruptcy NoticingUnclaimed Funds in BankruptcyJury ServiceSummoned for Federal Jury Service?Juror Selection ProcessTypes of JuriesJuror Qualifications, Exemptions and ExcusesJuror PayJuror ScamsFeesCourt of Appeals FeesDistrict Court FeesBankruptcy Court FeesElectronic Public Access FeesU.S. Court of Federal Claims FeesJudicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation FeesPost Judgment Interest RateFederal Court InterpretersInterpreter CategoriesFederal Court Interpreter Certification ExaminationInterpreter SkillsNational Court Interpreter Database (NCID) GatewayFederal Court Reporting ProgramProbation and Pretrial ServicesHistoryMissionOfficers and Officer AssistantsSupervisionData Release RegulationsDefender ServicesDefender Services MissionPublicationsBusiness OpportunitiesPre-Lapse in Appropriations Notice to ContractorsTransfer of Excess Judiciary Personal PropertyCourt RecordsFind a Case (PACER)Electronic Filing (CM/ECF)FAQs: CM/ECFCourt Records ScheduleElectronic Public Access Public User GroupStatistics & ReportsAnalysis & ReportsBAPCPA ReportCivil Justice Reform Act ReportFederal Court Management StatisticsFederal Judicial Caseload StatisticsJudicial Facts and FiguresJudicial BusinessStatistical Tables for the Federal JudiciaryWiretap ReportsDelayed-Notice Search WarrantFISA ReportDirector's Annual ReportBankruptcy Filings StatisticsCrime Victims’ Rights ReportData TablesPublicationsAsset Management Planning Process HandbookCivil Litigation Management ManualCourtroom TechnologyDodd Frank Act ReportFederal Court System in the U.S.Federal Probation JournalJournalist’s Guide to the Federal CourtsJudiciary Conferences That Cost More Than $100,000Long Range Plan for Information TechnologyLong Range Plan for the Federal CourtsStrategic Plan for Federal JudiciaryRules & PoliciesCurrent Rules of Practice & ProcedureFederal Rules of Civil ProcedureFederal Rules of Bankruptcy ProcedureAppellate Rules FormsPending Rules and Forms AmendmentsPending Changes in the Bankruptcy FormsProposed Amendments Published for Public CommentAbout the Rulemaking ProcessLaws and Procedures Governing the Work of the Rules CommitteesHow the Rulemaking Process WorksHow to Suggest a Change to Federal Court Rules and FormsHow to Submit Input on a Pending ProposalCommittee Membership SelectionOpen Meetings and Hearings of the Rules CommitteePermitted Changes to Official Bankruptcy FormsRecords of the Rules CommitteesAgenda BooksCommittee ReportsCongressional and Supreme Court Rules PackagesFJC Studies and Related PublicationsMeeting MinutesPast Members of the Rules CommitteesPreliminary Drafts of Proposed Rule AmendmentsRules CommentsRules SuggestionsSpecial Projects of the Rules CommitteesStyle ResourcesSuperseded Rules PamphletsTranscripts and TestimonyJudiciary PoliciesBankruptcy Case PoliciesCJA GuidelinesCourt Interpreting GuidanceCourt Reporting GuidanceEthics PoliciesWorkplace Conduct and ProtectionsFederal Tort ClaimsFraud, Waste, or Abuse PolicyGarnishment RegulationsJudiciary Staff Travel RegulationsPortable Communication DevicesPrivacy Policy for Electronic Case FilesProcurement PoliciesSubpoena RegulationsConfidentiality Regulations for Pretrial Services InformationProposed Changes to Code and JC&D RulesU.S. Courts Design Guide
Reports on criminal cases in which a right established in the Crime Victims’ Rights Act was asserted and relief was denied, describing the relief requested and the reason for the denial. Also discusses court rulings on petitions for writs of mandamus brought under this act. Covers decisions made during 12-month periods ending September 30.
This is the report to Congress on crime victims’ rights under §104(a) of the Justice for All Act of 2004, Pub. L. No. 108-405. Section 104(a) requires the Administrative Office of the United States Courts (AO) to report “the number of times that a right established in Chapter 237 of title 18, United States Code, is asserted in a criminal case and the relief requested is denied and, with respect to each such denial, the reason for such denial, as well as the number of times a mandamus action is brought pursuant to Chapter 237 of title 18, and the result reached.” Title I of the Justice for All Act of 2004 is commonly referred to as the Crime Victims’ Rights Act (CVRA) and is codified at 18 U.S.C. § 3771.
This site is maintained by the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts on behalf of the Federal Judiciary. The purpose of this site is to provide information from and about the Judicial Branch of the U.S. Government.
About Federal CourtsFederal Courts & the PublicVisit a Federal CourtCourt Website LinksFederal Court ScamsCourt Role and StructureComparing Federal & State CourtsAbout the U.S. Courts of AppealsTypes of CasesAppealsBankruptcy CasesCivil CasesCriminal CasesEducational ResourcesEducational ActivitiesSupreme Court LandmarksAnnual ObservancesAbout Educational OutreachGovernance & the Judicial ConferenceAbout the Judicial ConferenceCongressional Budget RequestJudicial AdministrationAdministrative Oversight and AccountabilityAudio Streaming PilotCameras in CourtsWorkplace ConductDirector of Workplace Relations Contacts by CircuitFact Sheet for Workplace Protections in the Federal JudiciaryBackground & ResourcesJudges & JudgeshipsAuthorized JudgeshipsJudgeship Appointments By PresidentChronological History of Authorized Judgeships - Courts of AppealsChronological History of Authorized Judgeships - District CourtsJudicial VacanciesCurrent Judicial VacanciesFuture Judicial VacanciesConfirmation ListingJudicial EmergenciesArchive of Judicial VacanciesJudicial MilestonesJudicial CompensationAbout Federal JudgesPathways to the Bench Video SeriesRoadways to the Bench: Who Me? A Bankruptcy or Magistrate Judge?Judiciary Financial Disclosure ReportsPrivately Funded Seminars DisclosureLog in & Create AccountOverviewStatement of PurposeInstructionsPolicyFrequently Asked QuestionsJudicial Conduct & DisabilityFAQs: Filing a Judicial Conduct or Disability Complaint Against a Federal JudgeJudicial Conduct and Disability OrdersArchives of the Committee on Judicial Conduct and DisabilityCode of Conduct for U.S. JudgesServices & FormsFormsAttorney FormsBankruptcy FormsSuperseded Bankruptcy FormsCivil FormsCriminal FormsCourt Reporter FormsCJA FormsHuman Resources FormsJury FormsOther FormsBankruptcyBankruptcy BasicsFiling Without an AttorneyCredit Counseling and Debtor EducationTrustees and AdministratorsBankruptcy NoticingUnclaimed Funds in BankruptcyJury ServiceSummoned for Federal Jury Service?Juror Selection ProcessTypes of JuriesJuror Qualifications, Exemptions and ExcusesJuror PayJuror ScamsFeesCourt of Appeals FeesDistrict Court FeesBankruptcy Court FeesElectronic Public Access FeesU.S. Court of Federal Claims FeesJudicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation FeesPost Judgment Interest RateFederal Court InterpretersInterpreter CategoriesFederal Court Interpreter Certification ExaminationInterpreter SkillsNational Court Interpreter Database (NCID) GatewayFederal Court Reporting ProgramProbation and Pretrial ServicesHistoryMissionOfficers and Officer AssistantsSupervisionData Release RegulationsDefender ServicesDefender Services MissionPublicationsBusiness OpportunitiesPre-Lapse in Appropriations Notice to ContractorsTransfer of Excess Judiciary Personal PropertyCourt RecordsFind a Case (PACER)Electronic Filing (CM/ECF)FAQs: CM/ECFCourt Records ScheduleElectronic Public Access Public User GroupStatistics & ReportsAnalysis & ReportsBAPCPA ReportCivil Justice Reform Act ReportFederal Court Management StatisticsFederal Judicial Caseload StatisticsJudicial Facts and FiguresJudicial BusinessStatistical Tables for the Federal JudiciaryWiretap ReportsDelayed-Notice Search WarrantFISA ReportDirector's Annual ReportBankruptcy Filings StatisticsCrime Victims’ Rights ReportData TablesPublicationsAsset Management Planning Process HandbookCivil Litigation Management ManualCourtroom TechnologyDodd Frank Act ReportFederal Court System in the U.S.Federal Probation JournalJournalist’s Guide to the Federal CourtsJudiciary Conferences That Cost More Than $100,000Long Range Plan for Information TechnologyLong Range Plan for the Federal CourtsStrategic Plan for Federal JudiciaryRules & PoliciesCurrent Rules of Practice & ProcedureFederal Rules of Civil ProcedureFederal Rules of Bankruptcy ProcedureAppellate Rules FormsPending Rules and Forms AmendmentsPending Changes in the Bankruptcy FormsProposed Amendments Published for Public CommentAbout the Rulemaking ProcessLaws and Procedures Governing the Work of the Rules CommitteesHow the Rulemaking Process WorksHow to Suggest a Change to Federal Court Rules and FormsHow to Submit Input on a Pending ProposalCommittee Membership SelectionOpen Meetings and Hearings of the Rules CommitteePermitted Changes to Official Bankruptcy FormsRecords of the Rules CommitteesAgenda BooksCommittee ReportsCongressional and Supreme Court Rules PackagesFJC Studies and Related PublicationsMeeting MinutesPast Members of the Rules CommitteesPreliminary Drafts of Proposed Rule AmendmentsRules CommentsRules SuggestionsSpecial Projects of the Rules CommitteesStyle ResourcesSuperseded Rules PamphletsTranscripts and TestimonyJudiciary PoliciesBankruptcy Case PoliciesCJA GuidelinesCourt Interpreting GuidanceCourt Reporting GuidanceEthics PoliciesWorkplace Conduct and ProtectionsFederal Tort ClaimsFraud, Waste, or Abuse PolicyGarnishment RegulationsJudiciary Staff Travel RegulationsPortable Communication DevicesPrivacy Policy for Electronic Case FilesProcurement PoliciesSubpoena RegulationsConfidentiality Regulations for Pretrial Services InformationProposed Changes to Code and JC&D RulesU.S. Courts Design Guide
The rulemaking process is governed primarily by the Rules Enabling Act and the Procedures for the Judicial Conference's Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure and Its Advisory Rules Committees.
The Rules Enabling Act, 28 U.S.C. § 2071-2077, authorizes the Supreme Court to prescribe general rules of practice and procedure and rules of evidence for the federal courts. The Act has been described as a treaty between Congress and the judiciary and represents a manifestation of the traditional doctrine of separation of powers. Congress, through the Act, delegated the essential rulemaking function to a co-equal branch of government while retaining the ability to review and reject any rule adopted by the Supreme Court.
Pursuant to Section 2073 of the Rules Enabling Act, the Judicial Conference has established procedures to govern the work of the Standing Committee and its advisory rules committees. These procedures do not limit the rules committees' authority, and failure to comply with them does not invalidate any rules committee action.
This site is maintained by the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts on behalf of the Federal Judiciary. The purpose of this site is to provide information from and about the Judicial Branch of the U.S. Government.
About Federal CourtsFederal Courts & the PublicVisit a Federal CourtCourt Website LinksFederal Court ScamsCourt Role and StructureComparing Federal & State CourtsAbout the U.S. Courts of AppealsTypes of CasesAppealsBankruptcy CasesCivil CasesCriminal CasesEducational ResourcesEducational ActivitiesSupreme Court LandmarksAnnual ObservancesAbout Educational OutreachGovernance & the Judicial ConferenceAbout the Judicial ConferenceCongressional Budget RequestJudicial AdministrationAdministrative Oversight and AccountabilityAudio Streaming PilotCameras in CourtsWorkplace ConductDirector of Workplace Relations Contacts by CircuitFact Sheet for Workplace Protections in the Federal JudiciaryBackground & ResourcesJudges & JudgeshipsAuthorized JudgeshipsJudgeship Appointments By PresidentChronological History of Authorized Judgeships - Courts of AppealsChronological History of Authorized Judgeships - District CourtsJudicial VacanciesCurrent Judicial VacanciesFuture Judicial VacanciesConfirmation ListingJudicial EmergenciesArchive of Judicial VacanciesJudicial MilestonesJudicial CompensationAbout Federal JudgesPathways to the Bench Video SeriesRoadways to the Bench: Who Me? A Bankruptcy or Magistrate Judge?Judiciary Financial Disclosure ReportsPrivately Funded Seminars DisclosureLog in & Create AccountOverviewStatement of PurposeInstructionsPolicyFrequently Asked QuestionsJudicial Conduct & DisabilityFAQs: Filing a Judicial Conduct or Disability Complaint Against a Federal JudgeJudicial Conduct and Disability OrdersArchives of the Committee on Judicial Conduct and DisabilityCode of Conduct for U.S. JudgesServices & FormsFormsAttorney FormsBankruptcy FormsSuperseded Bankruptcy FormsCivil FormsCriminal FormsCourt Reporter FormsCJA FormsHuman Resources FormsJury FormsOther FormsBankruptcyBankruptcy BasicsFiling Without an AttorneyCredit Counseling and Debtor EducationTrustees and AdministratorsBankruptcy NoticingUnclaimed Funds in BankruptcyJury ServiceSummoned for Federal Jury Service?Juror Selection ProcessTypes of JuriesJuror Qualifications, Exemptions and ExcusesJuror PayJuror ScamsFeesCourt of Appeals FeesDistrict Court FeesBankruptcy Court FeesElectronic Public Access FeesU.S. Court of Federal Claims FeesJudicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation FeesPost Judgment Interest RateFederal Court InterpretersInterpreter CategoriesFederal Court Interpreter Certification ExaminationInterpreter SkillsNational Court Interpreter Database (NCID) GatewayFederal Court Reporting ProgramProbation and Pretrial ServicesHistoryMissionOfficers and Officer AssistantsSupervisionData Release RegulationsDefender ServicesDefender Services MissionPublicationsBusiness OpportunitiesPre-Lapse in Appropriations Notice to ContractorsTransfer of Excess Judiciary Personal PropertyCourt RecordsFind a Case (PACER)Electronic Filing (CM/ECF)FAQs: CM/ECFCourt Records ScheduleElectronic Public Access Public User GroupStatistics & ReportsAnalysis & ReportsBAPCPA ReportCivil Justice Reform Act ReportFederal Court Management StatisticsFederal Judicial Caseload StatisticsJudicial Facts and FiguresJudicial BusinessStatistical Tables for the Federal JudiciaryWiretap ReportsDelayed-Notice Search WarrantFISA ReportDirector's Annual ReportBankruptcy Filings StatisticsCrime Victims’ Rights ReportData TablesPublicationsAsset Management Planning Process HandbookCivil Litigation Management ManualCourtroom TechnologyDodd Frank Act ReportFederal Court System in the U.S.Federal Probation JournalJournalist’s Guide to the Federal CourtsJudiciary Conferences That Cost More Than $100,000Long Range Plan for Information TechnologyLong Range Plan for the Federal CourtsStrategic Plan for Federal JudiciaryRules & PoliciesCurrent Rules of Practice & ProcedureFederal Rules of Civil ProcedureFederal Rules of Bankruptcy ProcedureAppellate Rules FormsPending Rules and Forms AmendmentsPending Changes in the Bankruptcy FormsProposed Amendments Published for Public CommentAbout the Rulemaking ProcessLaws and Procedures Governing the Work of the Rules CommitteesHow the Rulemaking Process WorksHow to Suggest a Change to Federal Court Rules and FormsHow to Submit Input on a Pending ProposalCommittee Membership SelectionOpen Meetings and Hearings of the Rules CommitteePermitted Changes to Official Bankruptcy FormsRecords of the Rules CommitteesAgenda BooksCommittee ReportsCongressional and Supreme Court Rules PackagesFJC Studies and Related PublicationsMeeting MinutesPast Members of the Rules CommitteesPreliminary Drafts of Proposed Rule AmendmentsRules CommentsRules SuggestionsSpecial Projects of the Rules CommitteesStyle ResourcesSuperseded Rules PamphletsTranscripts and TestimonyJudiciary PoliciesBankruptcy Case PoliciesCJA GuidelinesCourt Interpreting GuidanceCourt Reporting GuidanceEthics PoliciesWorkplace Conduct and ProtectionsFederal Tort ClaimsFraud, Waste, or Abuse PolicyGarnishment RegulationsJudiciary Staff Travel RegulationsPortable Communication DevicesPrivacy Policy for Electronic Case FilesProcurement PoliciesSubpoena RegulationsConfidentiality Regulations for Pretrial Services InformationProposed Changes to Code and JC&D RulesU.S. Courts Design Guide
This policy sets forth the responsibilities for reporting and responding to allegations of fraud, waste, or abuse of resources for judiciary organizations.
Oversight mechanisms work together to hold judges and Judiciary staff responsible for their conduct as government officials and for the management of public resources.
This site is maintained by the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts on behalf of the Federal Judiciary. The purpose of this site is to provide information from and about the Judicial Branch of the U.S. Government.
About Federal CourtsFederal Courts & the PublicVisit a Federal CourtCourt Website LinksFederal Court ScamsCourt Role and StructureComparing Federal & State CourtsAbout the U.S. Courts of AppealsTypes of CasesAppealsBankruptcy CasesCivil CasesCriminal CasesEducational ResourcesEducational ActivitiesSupreme Court LandmarksAnnual ObservancesAbout Educational OutreachGovernance & the Judicial ConferenceAbout the Judicial ConferenceCongressional Budget RequestJudicial AdministrationAdministrative Oversight and AccountabilityAudio Streaming PilotCameras in CourtsWorkplace ConductDirector of Workplace Relations Contacts by CircuitFact Sheet for Workplace Protections in the Federal JudiciaryBackground & ResourcesJudges & JudgeshipsAuthorized JudgeshipsJudgeship Appointments By PresidentChronological History of Authorized Judgeships - Courts of AppealsChronological History of Authorized Judgeships - District CourtsJudicial VacanciesCurrent Judicial VacanciesFuture Judicial VacanciesConfirmation ListingJudicial EmergenciesArchive of Judicial VacanciesJudicial MilestonesJudicial CompensationAbout Federal JudgesPathways to the Bench Video SeriesRoadways to the Bench: Who Me? A Bankruptcy or Magistrate Judge?Judiciary Financial Disclosure ReportsPrivately Funded Seminars DisclosureLog in & Create AccountOverviewStatement of PurposeInstructionsPolicyFrequently Asked QuestionsJudicial Conduct & DisabilityFAQs: Filing a Judicial Conduct or Disability Complaint Against a Federal JudgeJudicial Conduct and Disability OrdersArchives of the Committee on Judicial Conduct and DisabilityCode of Conduct for U.S. JudgesServices & FormsFormsAttorney FormsBankruptcy FormsSuperseded Bankruptcy FormsCivil FormsCriminal FormsCourt Reporter FormsCJA FormsHuman Resources FormsJury FormsOther FormsBankruptcyBankruptcy BasicsFiling Without an AttorneyCredit Counseling and Debtor EducationTrustees and AdministratorsBankruptcy NoticingUnclaimed Funds in BankruptcyJury ServiceSummoned for Federal Jury Service?Juror Selection ProcessTypes of JuriesJuror Qualifications, Exemptions and ExcusesJuror PayJuror ScamsFeesCourt of Appeals FeesDistrict Court FeesBankruptcy Court FeesElectronic Public Access FeesU.S. Court of Federal Claims FeesJudicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation FeesPost Judgment Interest RateFederal Court InterpretersInterpreter CategoriesFederal Court Interpreter Certification ExaminationInterpreter SkillsNational Court Interpreter Database (NCID) GatewayFederal Court Reporting ProgramProbation and Pretrial ServicesHistoryMissionOfficers and Officer AssistantsSupervisionData Release RegulationsDefender ServicesDefender Services MissionPublicationsBusiness OpportunitiesPre-Lapse in Appropriations Notice to ContractorsTransfer of Excess Judiciary Personal PropertyCourt RecordsFind a Case (PACER)Electronic Filing (CM/ECF)FAQs: CM/ECFCourt Records ScheduleElectronic Public Access Public User GroupStatistics & ReportsAnalysis & ReportsBAPCPA ReportCivil Justice Reform Act ReportFederal Court Management StatisticsFederal Judicial Caseload StatisticsJudicial Facts and FiguresJudicial BusinessStatistical Tables for the Federal JudiciaryWiretap ReportsDelayed-Notice Search WarrantFISA ReportDirector's Annual ReportBankruptcy Filings StatisticsCrime Victims’ Rights ReportData TablesPublicationsAsset Management Planning Process HandbookCivil Litigation Management ManualCourtroom TechnologyDodd Frank Act ReportFederal Court System in the U.S.Federal Probation JournalJournalist’s Guide to the Federal CourtsJudiciary Conferences That Cost More Than $100,000Long Range Plan for Information TechnologyLong Range Plan for the Federal CourtsStrategic Plan for Federal JudiciaryRules & PoliciesCurrent Rules of Practice & ProcedureFederal Rules of Civil ProcedureFederal Rules of Bankruptcy ProcedureAppellate Rules FormsPending Rules and Forms AmendmentsPending Changes in the Bankruptcy FormsProposed Amendments Published for Public CommentAbout the Rulemaking ProcessLaws and Procedures Governing the Work of the Rules CommitteesHow the Rulemaking Process WorksHow to Suggest a Change to Federal Court Rules and FormsHow to Submit Input on a Pending ProposalCommittee Membership SelectionOpen Meetings and Hearings of the Rules CommitteePermitted Changes to Official Bankruptcy FormsRecords of the Rules CommitteesAgenda BooksCommittee ReportsCongressional and Supreme Court Rules PackagesFJC Studies and Related PublicationsMeeting MinutesPast Members of the Rules CommitteesPreliminary Drafts of Proposed Rule AmendmentsRules CommentsRules SuggestionsSpecial Projects of the Rules CommitteesStyle ResourcesSuperseded Rules PamphletsTranscripts and TestimonyJudiciary PoliciesBankruptcy Case PoliciesCJA GuidelinesCourt Interpreting GuidanceCourt Reporting GuidanceEthics PoliciesWorkplace Conduct and ProtectionsFederal Tort ClaimsFraud, Waste, or Abuse PolicyGarnishment RegulationsJudiciary Staff Travel RegulationsPortable Communication DevicesPrivacy Policy for Electronic Case FilesProcurement PoliciesSubpoena RegulationsConfidentiality Regulations for Pretrial Services InformationProposed Changes to Code and JC&D RulesU.S. Courts Design Guide
The Judicial Conference of the U.S. approved the latest version of the policy in March 2008 to streamline the policy and eliminate provisions that are duplicative of the Rules of Practice and Procedure.
Amendments to the Appellate, Bankruptcy, Civil, and Criminal Rules to implement the requirements of the E-Government Act of 2002 took effect on December 1, 2007. The new rules codify, to a large extent, the 2001 Judicial Conference privacy policy, as revised in 2003, requiring redaction of personal identifier information from filings1. The personal identifiers to be redacted are Social Security numbers, names of minor children, financial account numbers, dates of birth, and, in criminal cases, home addresses2.
Because of the enactment of the rules, the previous policy is no longer operative except for two portions of the earlier privacy policy that remain in force, separate from the new rules. They are listed below.
The following documents in a criminal case shall not be included in the public case file and should not be made available to the public at the courthouse or via remote electronic access:
sealed documents (e.g., motions for downward departure for substantial assistance, plea agreements indicating cooperation or victim statements).
Courts making electronic documents remotely available to the public shall make electronic transcripts of proceedings remotely available to the public if such transcripts are prepared. Prior to being made electronically available from a remote location, however, the transcripts must conform to Fed. R. Civ. P. 5.2(a), Fed. R. Crim. P. 49.1(a), or Fed. R. Bankr. P. 9037(a).
Once a prepared transcript is delivered to the clerk’s office pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 753, the attorneys in the case are (or, where there is a self-represented party, the party is) responsible for reviewing it for the personal data identifiers required by the federal rules to be redacted, and providing the court reporter or transcriber with a statement of the redactions to be made to comply with the rules. Unless otherwise ordered by the court, the attorney must review the following portions of the transcript:
Within seven calendar days of the delivery by the court reporter or transcriber of the official transcript to the clerk’s office, each attorney must inform the court, by filing a notice of redaction with the clerk, of his or her intent to direct the redaction of personal data identifiers from the electronic transcript of the court proceeding. If no such notice is filed within the allotted time, the court will assume redaction of personal data identifiers from the transcript is not necessary.
An attorney serving as “standby” counsel appointed to be available to assist a pro se defendant in his or her defense in a criminal case must review the same portions of the transcript as if the pro se defendant were his or her client. If the transcript relates to a panel attorney representation pursuant to the Criminal Justice Act (CJA), including serving as standby counsel, the attorney conducting the review is entitled to compensation under the CJA for functions reasonably performed to fulfill the redaction obligation and for reimbursement for related reasonable expenses.
A party is to submit to the court reporter or transcriber, within 21 calendar days of the transcript’s delivery to the clerk, or longer if a court so orders, a statement indicating where the personal data identifiers to be redacted appear in the transcript. The court reporter or transcriber must redact the identifiers as directed by the party.
These procedures are limited to the redaction of the specific personal data identifiers listed in the rules. During the 21-day period, or longer if the court so orders, an attorney may move the court for additional redactions to the transcript. The transcript shall not be made available on the internet until the court has ruled upon any such motion.
The court reporter or transcriber must, within 31 calendar days of the delivery of the transcript to the clerk of court, or longer if the court so orders, perform the requested redactions, and file a redacted version of the transcript with the clerk of court. The original unredacted electronic transcript should be retained by the clerk of court.
This policy applies to transcripts made available via CM/ECF, WEBPACER, PACER, RACER or a non-court related electronic depository (e.g., Exemplaris). It does not affect in any way the obligation of the court reporter or transcriber, pursuant to Judicial Conference policy, to promptly deliver to the clerk of court the court reporter’s or transcriber’s original records of a proceeding or the inclusion of a transcript with the records of the court.
Nothing in this policy changes any rules or policies with respect to sealing or redaction of court records for any other purpose.
This policy does not affect or limit the right of any party (or any other person or entity) to order production of a transcript on an expedited basis. This policy does not affect any court rules or ruling requiring the sealing of materials or the protection of sealed materials.
An attorney appointed pursuant to the Criminal Justice Act (CJA) is entitled to compensation under the CJA for functions performed to fulfill his or her obligations under the policy, including the following: (1) traveling to gain access to the transcript, if needed; (2) reviewing a transcript to determine whether to file notice of intent to redact; (3) filing a notice of intent to redact or a motion for an extension of time; (4) reviewing a transcript to determine the location of information to be requested to be redacted or whether to file a motion for additional redaction; (5) preparing and filing a redaction request or motion; and (6) other actions (including creating pleadings, attending hearings or other follow-up). The attorney is also entitled to reimbursement under the CJA for the costs of obtaining a transcript for purposes of review. If a case involving a CJA representation has already been closed and the original attorney is no longer available, or if standby counsel is no longer available, new counsel may be appointed under the CJA and compensated as outlined above. In the event that the original appointed counsel is still available, but has filed a final voucher for the underlying case, the attorney shall be permitted to file a supplemental voucher for compensation.
Extensions of time to comply with the deadlines set forth in these procedures should not be routinely granted, due to the potential for delay of court of appeals proceedings in the event redaction procedures extend beyond 31 days.
This site is maintained by the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts on behalf of the Federal Judiciary. The purpose of this site is to provide information from and about the Judicial Branch of the U.S. Government.
) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
<>/Font<>>>/Fields 361 0 R>>/Metadata 2 0 R/Names 254 0 R/Outlines 29 0 R/Pages 3 0 R/SpiderInfo 255 0 R/StructTreeRoot 13 0 R/Type/Catalog>>
) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
<>/DigestValue/DigestLocation[710339 34]            /Data 33 0 R>><>/DigestMethod/MD5/DigestValue/DigestLocation[710580 34]            /Data 33 0 R>>]/Name(Government Publishing Office)/Location(Government Publishing Office, Washington, DC 20401)/Reason(Government Publishing Office attests that this document has not been altered since it was disseminated by Government Publishing Office)/ContactInfo(Superintendent of Documents)/M(D:20221223194814-05'00')/Contents<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>/ByteRange[0 710983 723081 16591]                      /Prop_Build<>/App<>>>>>
About Federal CourtsFederal Courts & the PublicVisit a Federal CourtCourt Website LinksFederal Court ScamsCourt Role and StructureComparing Federal & State CourtsAbout the U.S. Courts of AppealsTypes of CasesAppealsBankruptcy CasesCivil CasesCriminal CasesEducational ResourcesEducational ActivitiesSupreme Court LandmarksAnnual ObservancesAbout Educational OutreachGovernance & the Judicial ConferenceAbout the Judicial ConferenceCongressional Budget RequestJudicial AdministrationAdministrative Oversight and AccountabilityAudio Streaming PilotCameras in CourtsWorkplace ConductDirector of Workplace Relations Contacts by CircuitFact Sheet for Workplace Protections in the Federal JudiciaryBackground & ResourcesJudges & JudgeshipsAuthorized JudgeshipsJudgeship Appointments By PresidentChronological History of Authorized Judgeships - Courts of AppealsChronological History of Authorized Judgeships - District CourtsJudicial VacanciesCurrent Judicial VacanciesFuture Judicial VacanciesConfirmation ListingJudicial EmergenciesArchive of Judicial VacanciesJudicial MilestonesJudicial CompensationAbout Federal JudgesPathways to the Bench Video SeriesRoadways to the Bench: Who Me? A Bankruptcy or Magistrate Judge?Judiciary Financial Disclosure ReportsPrivately Funded Seminars DisclosureLog in & Create AccountOverviewStatement of PurposeInstructionsPolicyFrequently Asked QuestionsJudicial Conduct & DisabilityFAQs: Filing a Judicial Conduct or Disability Complaint Against a Federal JudgeJudicial Conduct and Disability OrdersArchives of the Committee on Judicial Conduct and DisabilityCode of Conduct for U.S. JudgesServices & FormsFormsAttorney FormsBankruptcy FormsSuperseded Bankruptcy FormsCivil FormsCriminal FormsCourt Reporter FormsCJA FormsHuman Resources FormsJury FormsOther FormsBankruptcyBankruptcy BasicsFiling Without an AttorneyCredit Counseling and Debtor EducationTrustees and AdministratorsBankruptcy NoticingUnclaimed Funds in BankruptcyJury ServiceSummoned for Federal Jury Service?Juror Selection ProcessTypes of JuriesJuror Qualifications, Exemptions and ExcusesJuror PayJuror ScamsFeesCourt of Appeals FeesDistrict Court FeesBankruptcy Court FeesElectronic Public Access FeesU.S. Court of Federal Claims FeesJudicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation FeesPost Judgment Interest RateFederal Court InterpretersInterpreter CategoriesFederal Court Interpreter Certification ExaminationInterpreter SkillsNational Court Interpreter Database (NCID) GatewayFederal Court Reporting ProgramProbation and Pretrial ServicesHistoryMissionOfficers and Officer AssistantsSupervisionData Release RegulationsDefender ServicesDefender Services MissionPublicationsBusiness OpportunitiesPre-Lapse in Appropriations Notice to ContractorsTransfer of Excess Judiciary Personal PropertyCourt RecordsFind a Case (PACER)Electronic Filing (CM/ECF)FAQs: CM/ECFCourt Records ScheduleElectronic Public Access Public User GroupStatistics & ReportsAnalysis & ReportsBAPCPA ReportCivil Justice Reform Act ReportFederal Court Management StatisticsFederal Judicial Caseload StatisticsJudicial Facts and FiguresJudicial BusinessStatistical Tables for the Federal JudiciaryWiretap ReportsDelayed-Notice Search WarrantFISA ReportDirector's Annual ReportBankruptcy Filings StatisticsCrime Victims’ Rights ReportData TablesPublicationsAsset Management Planning Process HandbookCivil Litigation Management ManualCourtroom TechnologyDodd Frank Act ReportFederal Court System in the U.S.Federal Probation JournalJournalist’s Guide to the Federal CourtsJudiciary Conferences That Cost More Than $100,000Long Range Plan for Information TechnologyLong Range Plan for the Federal CourtsStrategic Plan for Federal JudiciaryRules & PoliciesCurrent Rules of Practice & ProcedureFederal Rules of Civil ProcedureFederal Rules of Bankruptcy ProcedureAppellate Rules FormsPending Rules and Forms AmendmentsPending Changes in the Bankruptcy FormsProposed Amendments Published for Public CommentAbout the Rulemaking ProcessLaws and Procedures Governing the Work of the Rules CommitteesHow the Rulemaking Process WorksHow to Suggest a Change to Federal Court Rules and FormsHow to Submit Input on a Pending ProposalCommittee Membership SelectionOpen Meetings and Hearings of the Rules CommitteePermitted Changes to Official Bankruptcy FormsRecords of the Rules CommitteesAgenda BooksCommittee ReportsCongressional and Supreme Court Rules PackagesFJC Studies and Related PublicationsMeeting MinutesPast Members of the Rules CommitteesPreliminary Drafts of Proposed Rule AmendmentsRules CommentsRules SuggestionsSpecial Projects of the Rules CommitteesStyle ResourcesSuperseded Rules PamphletsTranscripts and TestimonyJudiciary PoliciesBankruptcy Case PoliciesCJA GuidelinesCourt Interpreting GuidanceCourt Reporting GuidanceEthics PoliciesWorkplace Conduct and ProtectionsFederal Tort ClaimsFraud, Waste, or Abuse PolicyGarnishment RegulationsJudiciary Staff Travel RegulationsPortable Communication DevicesPrivacy Policy for Electronic Case FilesProcurement PoliciesSubpoena RegulationsConfidentiality Regulations for Pretrial Services InformationProposed Changes to Code and JC&D RulesU.S. Courts Design Guide
The 14th Amendment provides, in part, that no state can "deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws." Title IX specifically prohibits sex discrimination.
Ratified in 1868, Congress and the courts have applied the 14th Amendment’s Equal Protection Clause to many aspects of public life over the past 150 years. Title IX is an example of how the 14th Amendment has been interpreted over time. Title IX, which is of particular interest to young people, prohibits institutions that receive federal funding from excluding students from participating in educational and athletic programs on the basis of sex.
Specifically, Title IX states that “No person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from the participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.”
Title IX of the Civil Rights Act was signed into law on June 23, 1972 by President Richard M. Nixon. However, Title IX began its journey through all three branches of government when Representative Patsy T. Mink, of Hawaii, who is recognized as the major author and sponsor of the legislation, introduced it in Congress. When she died in 2002, Title IX was renamed the Patsy Mink Equal Opportunity in Education Act. She was given the Medal of Freedom after her death.
One way to track the evolution of Title IX is to examine the Supreme Court’s 1984 decision in Grove City College v. Bell. As the high court’s first Title IX case, the issues that arose from the Act, demonstrate how each of the three branches exercises its authority. The case makes Title IX a study not only of the 14th Amendment but also of the impact of the push and pull of the separation of powers on law-abiding citizens.
The Legislative Branch. Congress enacted Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, which requires that no person be excluded from participation in, denied the benefits of, or subjected to discrimination on the basis of sex under “any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.” It authorizes any federal agency that provides such assistance to issue regulations to enforce the prohibition of sex discrimination. It also allows termination of financial assistance when an institution does not voluntarily comply.
The Executive Branch. In 1975, the United States Department of Health, Education and Welfare (which became the Department of Education and is referred to here as the Department) issued implementing regulations requiring every educational institution that receives federal financial assistance to file a document assuring its compliance with Title IX.
The Judicial Branch. The Supreme Court of the United States ruled in 1984 that Title IX’s non-discrimination and compliance requirements apply to any educational institution that receives federal financial assistance through grants provided directly to its students. At that time, the requirement applied only to the specific program or activity receiving federal assistance.  In this instance the program was student financial aid.
The Legislative Branch. In early 1988, the Senate and House of Representatives each responded to the Supreme Court decision by passing legislation (Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987) which clarifies that a “program or activity,” for purposes of Title IX and other civil rights laws, refers to “all operations” of an institution whenever federal financial assistance is extended to “any part” of the institution.
The Executive Branch. On March 16, 1988, President Reagan vetoed the legislation on grounds that it “vastly and unjustifiably expand[s] the power of the [f]ederal government over the decisions and affairs of private organizations.”
The Legislative Branch. On March 22, 1988, Congress overrode the President’s veto by passing again the legislation with the support of a two-thirds majority in the House and Senate. As a result, the Civil Rights Restoration Act became law.
To get started, review the glossary and prepare students to use it with the case materials to underline terms and concept they find in the readings.
Have students read the Grove City College v. Bell facts and case summary and make a list of their questions and arguments.
Have students use the Title IX timeline as a reference for drawing a Venn Diagram or double bubble map to list the impacts of each branch of government on the evolution of Title IX.
Use the separation of powers discussion questions to illuminate how the push and pull of the three branches of government shaped Title IX. Guide students’ understanding of how the separation of powers has an impact on the their daily life and the issues that matter to them.
Have students view the Ahead of the Majority video on Representative Patsy Mink, often called the Mother of Title IX. Next, have students select a Pathways to the Bench video profile of a federal judge whose story also deals with personal adversities that motivated them to be of service.
DISCLAIMER: These resources are created by the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts for educational purposes only. They may not reflect the current state of the law, and are not intended to provide legal advice, guidance on litigation, or commentary on any pending case or legislation.
The 14th Amendment and the Evolution of Title IX Grove City College v. Bell - Facts and Case Summary Grove City College v. Bell - Glossary Grove City College v. Bell - Discussion Questions
This site is maintained by the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts on behalf of the Federal Judiciary. The purpose of this site is to provide information from and about the Judicial Branch of the U.S. Government.
PATSY MINK: AHEAD OF THE MAJORITY | Women Make Movies | Trailer - YouTubeAboutPressCopyrightContact usCreatorsAdvertiseDevelopersTermsPrivacyPolicy & SafetyHow YouTube worksTest new featuresNFL Sunday Ticket© 2023 Google LLC
About Federal CourtsFederal Courts & the PublicVisit a Federal CourtCourt Website LinksFederal Court ScamsCourt Role and StructureComparing Federal & State CourtsAbout the U.S. Courts of AppealsTypes of CasesAppealsBankruptcy CasesCivil CasesCriminal CasesEducational ResourcesEducational ActivitiesSupreme Court LandmarksAnnual ObservancesAbout Educational OutreachGovernance & the Judicial ConferenceAbout the Judicial ConferenceCongressional Budget RequestJudicial AdministrationAdministrative Oversight and AccountabilityAudio Streaming PilotCameras in CourtsWorkplace ConductDirector of Workplace Relations Contacts by CircuitFact Sheet for Workplace Protections in the Federal JudiciaryBackground & ResourcesJudges & JudgeshipsAuthorized JudgeshipsJudgeship Appointments By PresidentChronological History of Authorized Judgeships - Courts of AppealsChronological History of Authorized Judgeships - District CourtsJudicial VacanciesCurrent Judicial VacanciesFuture Judicial VacanciesConfirmation ListingJudicial EmergenciesArchive of Judicial VacanciesJudicial MilestonesJudicial CompensationAbout Federal JudgesPathways to the Bench Video SeriesRoadways to the Bench: Who Me? A Bankruptcy or Magistrate Judge?Judiciary Financial Disclosure ReportsPrivately Funded Seminars DisclosureLog in & Create AccountOverviewStatement of PurposeInstructionsPolicyFrequently Asked QuestionsJudicial Conduct & DisabilityFAQs: Filing a Judicial Conduct or Disability Complaint Against a Federal JudgeJudicial Conduct and Disability OrdersArchives of the Committee on Judicial Conduct and DisabilityCode of Conduct for U.S. JudgesServices & FormsFormsAttorney FormsBankruptcy FormsSuperseded Bankruptcy FormsCivil FormsCriminal FormsCourt Reporter FormsCJA FormsHuman Resources FormsJury FormsOther FormsBankruptcyBankruptcy BasicsFiling Without an AttorneyCredit Counseling and Debtor EducationTrustees and AdministratorsBankruptcy NoticingUnclaimed Funds in BankruptcyJury ServiceSummoned for Federal Jury Service?Juror Selection ProcessTypes of JuriesJuror Qualifications, Exemptions and ExcusesJuror PayJuror ScamsFeesCourt of Appeals FeesDistrict Court FeesBankruptcy Court FeesElectronic Public Access FeesU.S. Court of Federal Claims FeesJudicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation FeesPost Judgment Interest RateFederal Court InterpretersInterpreter CategoriesFederal Court Interpreter Certification ExaminationInterpreter SkillsNational Court Interpreter Database (NCID) GatewayFederal Court Reporting ProgramProbation and Pretrial ServicesHistoryMissionOfficers and Officer AssistantsSupervisionData Release RegulationsDefender ServicesDefender Services MissionPublicationsBusiness OpportunitiesPre-Lapse in Appropriations Notice to ContractorsTransfer of Excess Judiciary Personal PropertyCourt RecordsFind a Case (PACER)Electronic Filing (CM/ECF)FAQs: CM/ECFCourt Records ScheduleElectronic Public Access Public User GroupStatistics & ReportsAnalysis & ReportsBAPCPA ReportCivil Justice Reform Act ReportFederal Court Management StatisticsFederal Judicial Caseload StatisticsJudicial Facts and FiguresJudicial BusinessStatistical Tables for the Federal JudiciaryWiretap ReportsDelayed-Notice Search WarrantFISA ReportDirector's Annual ReportBankruptcy Filings StatisticsCrime Victims’ Rights ReportData TablesPublicationsAsset Management Planning Process HandbookCivil Litigation Management ManualCourtroom TechnologyDodd Frank Act ReportFederal Court System in the U.S.Federal Probation JournalJournalist’s Guide to the Federal CourtsJudiciary Conferences That Cost More Than $100,000Long Range Plan for Information TechnologyLong Range Plan for the Federal CourtsStrategic Plan for Federal JudiciaryRules & PoliciesCurrent Rules of Practice & ProcedureFederal Rules of Civil ProcedureFederal Rules of Bankruptcy ProcedureAppellate Rules FormsPending Rules and Forms AmendmentsPending Changes in the Bankruptcy FormsProposed Amendments Published for Public CommentAbout the Rulemaking ProcessLaws and Procedures Governing the Work of the Rules CommitteesHow the Rulemaking Process WorksHow to Suggest a Change to Federal Court Rules and FormsHow to Submit Input on a Pending ProposalCommittee Membership SelectionOpen Meetings and Hearings of the Rules CommitteePermitted Changes to Official Bankruptcy FormsRecords of the Rules CommitteesAgenda BooksCommittee ReportsCongressional and Supreme Court Rules PackagesFJC Studies and Related PublicationsMeeting MinutesPast Members of the Rules CommitteesPreliminary Drafts of Proposed Rule AmendmentsRules CommentsRules SuggestionsSpecial Projects of the Rules CommitteesStyle ResourcesSuperseded Rules PamphletsTranscripts and TestimonyJudiciary PoliciesBankruptcy Case PoliciesCJA GuidelinesCourt Interpreting GuidanceCourt Reporting GuidanceEthics PoliciesWorkplace Conduct and ProtectionsFederal Tort ClaimsFraud, Waste, or Abuse PolicyGarnishment RegulationsJudiciary Staff Travel RegulationsPortable Communication DevicesPrivacy Policy for Electronic Case FilesProcurement PoliciesSubpoena RegulationsConfidentiality Regulations for Pretrial Services InformationProposed Changes to Code and JC&D RulesU.S. Courts Design Guide
Thank you for visiting the federal Judiciary's website. This page outlines our privacy policy, security notice, vulnerability disclosure policy and information on official federal Judiciary pages on third-party websites.
Our privacy policy outlines the types of information we learn when you visit our site and how such information will be used.
If you visit our website to view or download information, we collect and store the following information via Google Analytics:
The IP address from which you accessed the Judiciary's website. An IP address is a number automatically assigned to your computer whenever you are accessing the internet.
This information is used solely for the purpose of evaluating and maintaining our site. From this information, we learn what users like and need; what kind of technology they are using; how often they visit; and other valuable information that helps us to offer our visitors the best site possible. This information is collected anonymously and, in the aggregate, and no information is traceable to a specific individual.
We also participate in the Digital Analytics Program, which is a unified Google Analytics account of U.S. federal government agencies.
If you choose to provide us with personal information to be added to an email list, submit information through our Contact Us page, or submit feedback on the website, it will be used only for the purpose(s) you state. We collect such information only to respond to your requests or improve the website. We do not share that information with others, and we do not collect information for commercial marketing.
This is a restricted government system for official judiciary business only. All activities on this system for any purpose, and all access attempts, may be recorded and monitored or reviewed by persons authorized by the federal judiciary for improper use, protection of system security, performance of maintenance, and appropriate management by the judiciary of its systems. By using this system or any connected system, users expressly consent to system monitoring and to official access to data reviewed and created by them on the system. Any evidence of unlawful activity, including unauthorized access attempts, may be reported to law enforcement officials.
Unauthorized attempts to upload or change information on this server are strictly prohibited and may be punishable by law, including the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986 and the National Information Infrastructure Protection Act of 1996.
The federal Judiciary is committed to ensuring the security of the American public by protecting their information. On behalf of the federal Judiciary, the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts (AO) intends this policy to give security researchers clear guidelines for conducting vulnerability discovery activities and to convey our preferences in how to submit discovered vulnerabilities to us. Read the policy and learn how to report discovered vulnerabilities.
The AO maintains official social media accounts on behalf of the federal Judiciary on third-party websites, including YouTube, Twitter, and LinkedIn, to provide information about the federal Judiciary to a wider audience.
When you visit official federal Judiciary social media pages, the AO does not request, collect, or record personally identifiable information. Information collected by the AO will be used solely for the purpose of evaluating and maintaining those accounts. Please be aware that privacy policies of third-party websites may not be the same as the privacy policy governing uscourts.gov.
Retweets, likes, or follows of any person or organization on any social media page are not endorsements. Promoted Tweets on Twitter are not authorized or controlled by the AO.
The AO does not control, moderate, endorse, or respond to the comments, direct messages, or opinions provided by visitors to Twitter or LinkedIn.
On the Federal Judiciary YouTube channel all user comments are moderated, meaning all messages are reviewed before appearing. Comments must be civil and respectful of others.
AO moderators reserve the right to remove any comment that may be deemed inappropriate, violates these terms, or is not in line with the YouTube Community Guidelines.  Comments that contain threatening language will be forwarded to law enforcement.
This site is maintained by the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts on behalf of the Federal Judiciary. The purpose of this site is to provide information from and about the Judicial Branch of the U.S. Government.
If you believe your school, college, or university has violated Title IX,ï¿½learn more about how to file a complaintï¿½with the Departmentï¿½s Office for Civil Rights. Technical assistance inquiries, including questions regarding compliance with the new Title IX Rule, may be submitted to:ï¿½OCR@ed.gov.
Survivors are in the position of control to decide what happens after an incident of sexual harassment, including sexual assault, occurs.
Schools must respect a survivorï¿½s decision to file, or not to file, a formal complaint and must offer supportive measures either way.
Schools must respond promptly in every instance by offering to provide supportive measures like dorm reassignments or class schedule adjustments
Schools are forbidden from pressuring a survivor into filing or not filing a formal complaint or participating in a grievance process.
To protect younger students, K-12 schools must respond promptly when any school employee has notice of sexual harassment, including sexual assault.
The regulation extends to all aspects of a schoolï¿½s education program or activity and applies to any building owned or controlled by a student organization recognized by a college or university.
If a survivor chooses to participate in a grievance process, the regulation protects survivors from inappropriately being asked about prior sexual history (also known as ï¿½rape shieldï¿½ protections), and the survivor must not be required to divulge any medical, psychological, or similarly privileged records.
A survivor never has to come face-to-face with the accused during a hearing, and an accused is never allowed to personally ask questions of a survivor.
Survivors are protected against retaliation when they choose to report sexual misconduct or not, file a formal complaint or not, participate in a grievance process or not.
The regulation provides students with a right to written notice of allegations, the right to an advocate, and the right to submit, examine, and challenge evidence.
All students have the right to an impartial finding based on evidence using a standard of evidence ï¿½ either the preponderance of evidence standard or the clear and convincing standard ï¿½ that applies to all members of the school community, including faculty.
If you believe your school, college, or university has violated Title IX,ï¿½learn more about how to file a complaintï¿½with the Departmentï¿½s Office for Civil Rights. Technical assistance inquiries, including questions regarding compliance with the new Title IX Rule, may be submitted to:ï¿½OCR@ed.gov.
Survivors are in the position of control to decide what happens after an incident of sexual harassment, including sexual assault, occurs.
Schools must respect a survivorï¿½s decision to file, or not to file, a formal complaint and must offer supportive measures either way.
Schools must respond promptly in every instance by offering to provide supportive measures like dorm reassignments or class schedule adjustments
Schools are forbidden from pressuring a survivor into filing or not filing a formal complaint or participating in a grievance process.
To protect younger students, K-12 schools must respond promptly when any school employee has notice of sexual harassment, including sexual assault.
The regulation extends to all aspects of a schoolï¿½s education program or activity and applies to any building owned or controlled by a student organization recognized by a college or university.
If a survivor chooses to participate in a grievance process, the regulation protects survivors from inappropriately being asked about prior sexual history (also known as ï¿½rape shieldï¿½ protections), and the survivor must not be required to divulge any medical, psychological, or similarly privileged records.
A survivor never has to come face-to-face with the accused during a hearing, and an accused is never allowed to personally ask questions of a survivor.
Survivors are protected against retaliation when they choose to report sexual misconduct or not, file a formal complaint or not, participate in a grievance process or not.
The regulation provides students with a right to written notice of allegations, the right to an advocate, and the right to submit, examine, and challenge evidence.
All students have the right to an impartial finding based on evidence using a standard of evidence ï¿½ either the preponderance of evidence standard or the clear and convincing standard ï¿½ that applies to all members of the school community, including faculty.
If you believe your school, college, or university has violated Title IX,ï¿½learn more about how to file a complaintï¿½with the Departmentï¿½s Office for Civil Rights. Technical assistance inquiries, including questions regarding compliance with the new Title IX Rule, may be submitted to:ï¿½OCR@ed.gov.
Survivors are in the position of control to decide what happens after an incident of sexual harassment, including sexual assault, occurs.
Schools must respect a survivorï¿½s decision to file, or not to file, a formal complaint and must offer supportive measures either way.
Schools must respond promptly in every instance by offering to provide supportive measures like dorm reassignments or class schedule adjustments
Schools are forbidden from pressuring a survivor into filing or not filing a formal complaint or participating in a grievance process.
To protect younger students, K-12 schools must respond promptly when any school employee has notice of sexual harassment, including sexual assault.
The regulation extends to all aspects of a schoolï¿½s education program or activity and applies to any building owned or controlled by a student organization recognized by a college or university.
If a survivor chooses to participate in a grievance process, the regulation protects survivors from inappropriately being asked about prior sexual history (also known as ï¿½rape shieldï¿½ protections), and the survivor must not be required to divulge any medical, psychological, or similarly privileged records.
A survivor never has to come face-to-face with the accused during a hearing, and an accused is never allowed to personally ask questions of a survivor.
Survivors are protected against retaliation when they choose to report sexual misconduct or not, file a formal complaint or not, participate in a grievance process or not.
The regulation provides students with a right to written notice of allegations, the right to an advocate, and the right to submit, examine, and challenge evidence.
All students have the right to an impartial finding based on evidence using a standard of evidence ï¿½ either the preponderance of evidence standard or the clear and convincing standard ï¿½ that applies to all members of the school community, including faculty.
Due to aggressive automated scraping of FederalRegister.gov and eCFR.gov, programmatic access to these sites is limited to access to our extensive developer APIs.
The First Amendment and Title IX: An OCR Short Webinar - YouTubeAboutPressCopyrightContact usCreatorsAdvertiseDevelopersTermsPrivacyPolicy & SafetyHow YouTube worksTest new featuresNFL Sunday Ticketï¿½ 2023 Google LLC
OCR Short Webinar on How to Report Sexual Harassment under Title IX - YouTubeAboutPressCopyrightContact usCreatorsAdvertiseDevelopersTermsPrivacyPolicy & SafetyHow YouTube worksTest new featuresNFL Sunday Ticketï¿½ 2023 Google LLC
Conducting and Adjudicating Title IX Hearings: An OCR Training Webinar - YouTubeAboutPressCopyrightContact usCreatorsAdvertiseDevelopersTermsPrivacyPolicy & SafetyHow YouTube worksTest new featuresNFL Sunday Ticketï¿½ 2023 Google LLC
OCR Webinar on Due Process Protections under the New Title IX Regulations - YouTubeAboutPressCopyrightContact usCreatorsAdvertiseDevelopersTermsPrivacyPolicy & SafetyHow YouTube worksTest new featuresNFL Sunday Ticketï¿½ 2023 Google LLC
OCR Webinar on New Title IX Protections Against Sexual Assault - YouTubeAboutPressCopyrightContact usCreatorsAdvertiseDevelopersTermsPrivacyPolicy & SafetyHow YouTube worksTest new featuresNFL Sunday Ticketï¿½ 2023 Google LLC
Many of the pages on the site moved to new URLs during our recent redesign.  If you reached this page by using a bookmark or a link from another site, please search for the updated url using our Bookmark Search below.
If you arrived at this page by following a link within this site, please help us correct the problem by going to our Report Technical Issues form and logging the problem.
You can also search for the page content by using our Advanced Search page or contact site administrators via webmaster@ed.gov with any further technical questions.
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
Notices FOIAPrivacy PolicyAccessibilitySecurityInformation qualityInspector GeneralWhitehouse.govUSA.govBenefits.govRegulations.gov
If you believe your school, college, or university has violated Title IX,ï¿½learn more about how to file a complaintï¿½with the Departmentï¿½s Office for Civil Rights. Technical assistance inquiries, including questions regarding compliance with the new Title IX Rule, may be submitted to:ï¿½OCR@ed.gov.
Survivors are in the position of control to decide what happens after an incident of sexual harassment, including sexual assault, occurs.
Schools must respect a survivorï¿½s decision to file, or not to file, a formal complaint and must offer supportive measures either way.
Schools must respond promptly in every instance by offering to provide supportive measures like dorm reassignments or class schedule adjustments
Schools are forbidden from pressuring a survivor into filing or not filing a formal complaint or participating in a grievance process.
To protect younger students, K-12 schools must respond promptly when any school employee has notice of sexual harassment, including sexual assault.
The regulation extends to all aspects of a schoolï¿½s education program or activity and applies to any building owned or controlled by a student organization recognized by a college or university.
If a survivor chooses to participate in a grievance process, the regulation protects survivors from inappropriately being asked about prior sexual history (also known as ï¿½rape shieldï¿½ protections), and the survivor must not be required to divulge any medical, psychological, or similarly privileged records.
A survivor never has to come face-to-face with the accused during a hearing, and an accused is never allowed to personally ask questions of a survivor.
Survivors are protected against retaliation when they choose to report sexual misconduct or not, file a formal complaint or not, participate in a grievance process or not.
The regulation provides students with a right to written notice of allegations, the right to an advocate, and the right to submit, examine, and challenge evidence.
All students have the right to an impartial finding based on evidence using a standard of evidence ï¿½ either the preponderance of evidence standard or the clear and convincing standard ï¿½ that applies to all members of the school community, including faculty.
U.S. Department of Educationï¿½s Office for Civil Rights Announces Resolution of Sex-Based Harassment Investigation of Taft College in California
Our mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
