Title IX (On-Campus) Reporting | Sexual Assault Awareness & Response Support
Select PageReportingReporting Sexual MisconductTitle IX (On-Campus) ReportingReporting to the PoliceMandatory ReportersConfidential ReportingDefinitionsGet InvolvedEducational ResourcesVolunteerStudent GroupsGet HelpMedical ResourcesCounseling & SupportHow to help a friendCrisisSecondary Survivors
Title IX is a federal law that prohibits sex discrimination against all genders in educational institutions. Schools are required to ensure that campuses are free of sex discrimination and have an established procedure for handling complaints. The University of Utah has a Title IX coordinator to handle complaints of sex discrimination, including complaints of sexual assault and harassment:
Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action/Title IX
When disclosing information to a Title IX investigator, you may be asked for a description of the incident including the date, time, location, and information about the perpetrator(s). Reports of sexual misconduct are processed through the Title IX Coordinator, who is housed in the Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA). If you or a mandatory reporter disclose information to the OEO/AA, you may be contacted to provide more information. Throughout the process, you can control the information you share and can choose to stop sharing at any point. You may also choose to file a formal complaint and proceed with an investigation or resolve the matter through informal resolution.
Supportive Measures are available to help support you, whether or not you wish to file a formal complaint with our office. Supportive measures are non-disciplinary, non-punitive individualized services offered as appropriate, as reasonably available, and without fee or charge.  If you choose, we can work with the appropriate campus office to obtain extensions of deadlines or other course-related adjustments, modifications of work or class schedules, changes in work or housing locations, leaves of absence, refer you to counseling and/or victim advocacy services, and also implement safety and protective measures, such as no-contact directives, campus escort services, increased security and monitoring of certain areas of the campus and other similar measures. You may also request one-on-one training, education, or other requests as defined by you such as asking us to tell the other party that their behavior is expected to stop.  Training may be able to be implemented anonymously but that may limit our ability to address the behavior. Supportive Measures are available, whether or not you file a Formal Complaint with OEO/AA.
Choosing to report an incident of sexual misconduct can feel empowering for a survivor. However, the reporting process can be emotionally difficult. Some students may be reluctant to report to the police. Some students may also be wary of re-victimization and re-traumatization. The survivor should have the choice of whether or not to report and continue with an investigation. Talking to a confidential resource can help a survivor decide which options are best for them.
What is the investigation/adjudication process like?
Each investigation and adjudication process is individualized, but the following is a basic outline of the Title IX process related to allegations of sexual misconduct.  Under Title IX, there are two different types of cases:  1) Sexual misconduct is a broad term used to encompass a range of behaviors. It includes Sexual or Gender-Based Harassment, Intimate Partner Violence, Sexual Exploitation, Sexual Violence, Stalking, Nonconsensual Sexual Contact, and Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration. Sexual Misconduct is a type of Sex or Gender-Based Discrimination; and 2) Discrimination - Being treated differently because of sex/gender.
After a Title IX formal complaint is filed, the complaint is assessed to determine whether or not the conduct violates the university's nondiscrimination policies. Both the complaining party (person making the complaint) and the responding party (person who is accused of misconduct) are interviewed for information regarding the complaint. Parties may have an advisor of their choice with them when being interviewed. When available, documentary evidence is reviewed, and witnesses are interviewed as well. Investigations may take up to 60 days or the parties will be informed of the reasons the investigation cannot be completed within 60 days.
At the conclusion of the investigation, the OEO will issue recommendations that are published in a report that is shared with both parties to the complaint. Recommendations are categorized as either “cause,” or “insufficient evidence” as to whether university policy was violated.
If the OEO recommends that there is cause to believe that university policy has been violated, recommendations for disciplinary actions (sanctions) will be made. In the case of students, the Office of the Dean of Students makes recommendations for sanctions.
After the issuance of the OEO report, a hearing will be scheduled before a three-person hearing committee.  The hearing committee will make the decision whether or not a violation of university policy has occurred. The Hearing Committee will also make the decision as to any sanctions should be imposed against the Respondent and any remedies that should be provided to the Complainant.  Parties may have one advisor and one support person of their choice present at hearings. If a party does not have an advisor, a university-appointed advisor will be appointed, without fee or charge to the party.  A university-appointed advisor cannot provide advice, including legal advice to a party.  The role of a University-appointed advisor is for the sole purpose of conducting questioning of the other party, any witnesses, and any others who have provided information as part of the investigative or hearing process.  Hearings are usually held using Zoom or other similar technology. Students and staff may appeal the decision of the hearing committee to the applicable vice president. Faculty may appeal the decisions of the hearing committee to the president.
At the conclusion of the investigation, the OEO will issue findings that are published in a report that is shared with both parties to the complaint. Recommendations are categorized as either “cause,” or “insufficient evidence” as to whether university policy was violated.
If the OEO recommends that there is cause to believe that university policy has been violated, recommendations for disciplinary actions (sanctions) will be made. In the case of students, the Office of the Dean of Students makes recommendations for sanctions.
In discrimination cases, a hearing is not automatically scheduled.  Rather, either party may request a hearing before a hearing committee.  The process is similar to a sexual misconduct hearing as described above.  Parties may choose to have one advisor and one support person; except university-provided advisors are not appointed if a party does not have an advisor of their choice.
Get More Information on the University’s Sexual Misconduct Complaint Process
Get More Information on the University’s Sexual Misconduct Complaint Process
24-hour hotlines for information and support | If you are in immediate crisis or feel unsafe, call 911.
201 Presidents Circle Room 201SLC UT 84112801.581.7200
Privacy Policy  |  Disclaimer  |  Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Title IX (On-Campus) Reporting | Sexual Assault Awareness & Response Support
Select PageReportingReporting Sexual MisconductTitle IX (On-Campus) ReportingReporting to the PoliceMandatory ReportersConfidential ReportingDefinitionsGet InvolvedEducational ResourcesVolunteerStudent GroupsGet HelpMedical ResourcesCounseling & SupportHow to help a friendCrisisSecondary Survivors
Title IX is a federal law that prohibits sex discrimination against all genders in educational institutions. Schools are required to ensure that campuses are free of sex discrimination and have an established procedure for handling complaints. The University of Utah has a Title IX coordinator to handle complaints of sex discrimination, including complaints of sexual assault and harassment:
Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action/Title IX
When disclosing information to a Title IX investigator, you may be asked for a description of the incident including the date, time, location, and information about the perpetrator(s). Reports of sexual misconduct are processed through the Title IX Coordinator, who is housed in the Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA). If you or a mandatory reporter disclose information to the OEO/AA, you may be contacted to provide more information. Throughout the process, you can control the information you share and can choose to stop sharing at any point. You may also choose to file a formal complaint and proceed with an investigation or resolve the matter through informal resolution.
Supportive Measures are available to help support you, whether or not you wish to file a formal complaint with our office. Supportive measures are non-disciplinary, non-punitive individualized services offered as appropriate, as reasonably available, and without fee or charge.  If you choose, we can work with the appropriate campus office to obtain extensions of deadlines or other course-related adjustments, modifications of work or class schedules, changes in work or housing locations, leaves of absence, refer you to counseling and/or victim advocacy services, and also implement safety and protective measures, such as no-contact directives, campus escort services, increased security and monitoring of certain areas of the campus and other similar measures. You may also request one-on-one training, education, or other requests as defined by you such as asking us to tell the other party that their behavior is expected to stop.  Training may be able to be implemented anonymously but that may limit our ability to address the behavior. Supportive Measures are available, whether or not you file a Formal Complaint with OEO/AA.
Choosing to report an incident of sexual misconduct can feel empowering for a survivor. However, the reporting process can be emotionally difficult. Some students may be reluctant to report to the police. Some students may also be wary of re-victimization and re-traumatization. The survivor should have the choice of whether or not to report and continue with an investigation. Talking to a confidential resource can help a survivor decide which options are best for them.
What is the investigation/adjudication process like?
Each investigation and adjudication process is individualized, but the following is a basic outline of the Title IX process related to allegations of sexual misconduct.  Under Title IX, there are two different types of cases:  1) Sexual misconduct is a broad term used to encompass a range of behaviors. It includes Sexual or Gender-Based Harassment, Intimate Partner Violence, Sexual Exploitation, Sexual Violence, Stalking, Nonconsensual Sexual Contact, and Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration. Sexual Misconduct is a type of Sex or Gender-Based Discrimination; and 2) Discrimination - Being treated differently because of sex/gender.
After a Title IX formal complaint is filed, the complaint is assessed to determine whether or not the conduct violates the university's nondiscrimination policies. Both the complaining party (person making the complaint) and the responding party (person who is accused of misconduct) are interviewed for information regarding the complaint. Parties may have an advisor of their choice with them when being interviewed. When available, documentary evidence is reviewed, and witnesses are interviewed as well. Investigations may take up to 60 days or the parties will be informed of the reasons the investigation cannot be completed within 60 days.
At the conclusion of the investigation, the OEO will issue recommendations that are published in a report that is shared with both parties to the complaint. Recommendations are categorized as either “cause,” or “insufficient evidence” as to whether university policy was violated.
If the OEO recommends that there is cause to believe that university policy has been violated, recommendations for disciplinary actions (sanctions) will be made. In the case of students, the Office of the Dean of Students makes recommendations for sanctions.
After the issuance of the OEO report, a hearing will be scheduled before a three-person hearing committee.  The hearing committee will make the decision whether or not a violation of university policy has occurred. The Hearing Committee will also make the decision as to any sanctions should be imposed against the Respondent and any remedies that should be provided to the Complainant.  Parties may have one advisor and one support person of their choice present at hearings. If a party does not have an advisor, a university-appointed advisor will be appointed, without fee or charge to the party.  A university-appointed advisor cannot provide advice, including legal advice to a party.  The role of a University-appointed advisor is for the sole purpose of conducting questioning of the other party, any witnesses, and any others who have provided information as part of the investigative or hearing process.  Hearings are usually held using Zoom or other similar technology. Students and staff may appeal the decision of the hearing committee to the applicable vice president. Faculty may appeal the decisions of the hearing committee to the president.
At the conclusion of the investigation, the OEO will issue findings that are published in a report that is shared with both parties to the complaint. Recommendations are categorized as either “cause,” or “insufficient evidence” as to whether university policy was violated.
If the OEO recommends that there is cause to believe that university policy has been violated, recommendations for disciplinary actions (sanctions) will be made. In the case of students, the Office of the Dean of Students makes recommendations for sanctions.
In discrimination cases, a hearing is not automatically scheduled.  Rather, either party may request a hearing before a hearing committee.  The process is similar to a sexual misconduct hearing as described above.  Parties may choose to have one advisor and one support person; except university-provided advisors are not appointed if a party does not have an advisor of their choice.
Get More Information on the University’s Sexual Misconduct Complaint Process
Get More Information on the University’s Sexual Misconduct Complaint Process
24-hour hotlines for information and support | If you are in immediate crisis or feel unsafe, call 911.
201 Presidents Circle Room 201SLC UT 84112801.581.7200
Privacy Policy  |  Disclaimer  |  Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Reporting Sexual Misconduct | Sexual Assault Awareness & Response Support
Select PageReportingReporting Sexual MisconductTitle IX (On-Campus) ReportingReporting to the PoliceMandatory ReportersConfidential ReportingDefinitionsGet InvolvedEducational ResourcesVolunteerStudent GroupsGet HelpMedical ResourcesCounseling & SupportHow to help a friendCrisisSecondary Survivors
What happens if you file a sexual misconduct report on campus?
What happens if you file a sexual misconduct report with an officer?
Who are mandatory reporters and what are their responsibilities?
Who can I speak to confidentially and without reporting?
24-hour hotlines for information and support | If you are in immediate crisis or feel unsafe, call 911.
201 Presidents Circle Room 201SLC UT 84112801.581.7200
Privacy Policy  |  Disclaimer  |  Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Title IX (On-Campus) Reporting | Sexual Assault Awareness & Response Support
Select PageReportingReporting Sexual MisconductTitle IX (On-Campus) ReportingReporting to the PoliceMandatory ReportersConfidential ReportingDefinitionsGet InvolvedEducational ResourcesVolunteerStudent GroupsGet HelpMedical ResourcesCounseling & SupportHow to help a friendCrisisSecondary Survivors
Title IX is a federal law that prohibits sex discrimination against all genders in educational institutions. Schools are required to ensure that campuses are free of sex discrimination and have an established procedure for handling complaints. The University of Utah has a Title IX coordinator to handle complaints of sex discrimination, including complaints of sexual assault and harassment:
Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action/Title IX
When disclosing information to a Title IX investigator, you may be asked for a description of the incident including the date, time, location, and information about the perpetrator(s). Reports of sexual misconduct are processed through the Title IX Coordinator, who is housed in the Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA). If you or a mandatory reporter disclose information to the OEO/AA, you may be contacted to provide more information. Throughout the process, you can control the information you share and can choose to stop sharing at any point. You may also choose to file a formal complaint and proceed with an investigation or resolve the matter through informal resolution.
Supportive Measures are available to help support you, whether or not you wish to file a formal complaint with our office. Supportive measures are non-disciplinary, non-punitive individualized services offered as appropriate, as reasonably available, and without fee or charge.  If you choose, we can work with the appropriate campus office to obtain extensions of deadlines or other course-related adjustments, modifications of work or class schedules, changes in work or housing locations, leaves of absence, refer you to counseling and/or victim advocacy services, and also implement safety and protective measures, such as no-contact directives, campus escort services, increased security and monitoring of certain areas of the campus and other similar measures. You may also request one-on-one training, education, or other requests as defined by you such as asking us to tell the other party that their behavior is expected to stop.  Training may be able to be implemented anonymously but that may limit our ability to address the behavior. Supportive Measures are available, whether or not you file a Formal Complaint with OEO/AA.
Choosing to report an incident of sexual misconduct can feel empowering for a survivor. However, the reporting process can be emotionally difficult. Some students may be reluctant to report to the police. Some students may also be wary of re-victimization and re-traumatization. The survivor should have the choice of whether or not to report and continue with an investigation. Talking to a confidential resource can help a survivor decide which options are best for them.
What is the investigation/adjudication process like?
Each investigation and adjudication process is individualized, but the following is a basic outline of the Title IX process related to allegations of sexual misconduct.  Under Title IX, there are two different types of cases:  1) Sexual misconduct is a broad term used to encompass a range of behaviors. It includes Sexual or Gender-Based Harassment, Intimate Partner Violence, Sexual Exploitation, Sexual Violence, Stalking, Nonconsensual Sexual Contact, and Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration. Sexual Misconduct is a type of Sex or Gender-Based Discrimination; and 2) Discrimination - Being treated differently because of sex/gender.
After a Title IX formal complaint is filed, the complaint is assessed to determine whether or not the conduct violates the university's nondiscrimination policies. Both the complaining party (person making the complaint) and the responding party (person who is accused of misconduct) are interviewed for information regarding the complaint. Parties may have an advisor of their choice with them when being interviewed. When available, documentary evidence is reviewed, and witnesses are interviewed as well. Investigations may take up to 60 days or the parties will be informed of the reasons the investigation cannot be completed within 60 days.
At the conclusion of the investigation, the OEO will issue recommendations that are published in a report that is shared with both parties to the complaint. Recommendations are categorized as either “cause,” or “insufficient evidence” as to whether university policy was violated.
If the OEO recommends that there is cause to believe that university policy has been violated, recommendations for disciplinary actions (sanctions) will be made. In the case of students, the Office of the Dean of Students makes recommendations for sanctions.
After the issuance of the OEO report, a hearing will be scheduled before a three-person hearing committee.  The hearing committee will make the decision whether or not a violation of university policy has occurred. The Hearing Committee will also make the decision as to any sanctions should be imposed against the Respondent and any remedies that should be provided to the Complainant.  Parties may have one advisor and one support person of their choice present at hearings. If a party does not have an advisor, a university-appointed advisor will be appointed, without fee or charge to the party.  A university-appointed advisor cannot provide advice, including legal advice to a party.  The role of a University-appointed advisor is for the sole purpose of conducting questioning of the other party, any witnesses, and any others who have provided information as part of the investigative or hearing process.  Hearings are usually held using Zoom or other similar technology. Students and staff may appeal the decision of the hearing committee to the applicable vice president. Faculty may appeal the decisions of the hearing committee to the president.
At the conclusion of the investigation, the OEO will issue findings that are published in a report that is shared with both parties to the complaint. Recommendations are categorized as either “cause,” or “insufficient evidence” as to whether university policy was violated.
If the OEO recommends that there is cause to believe that university policy has been violated, recommendations for disciplinary actions (sanctions) will be made. In the case of students, the Office of the Dean of Students makes recommendations for sanctions.
In discrimination cases, a hearing is not automatically scheduled.  Rather, either party may request a hearing before a hearing committee.  The process is similar to a sexual misconduct hearing as described above.  Parties may choose to have one advisor and one support person; except university-provided advisors are not appointed if a party does not have an advisor of their choice.
Get More Information on the University’s Sexual Misconduct Complaint Process
Get More Information on the University’s Sexual Misconduct Complaint Process
24-hour hotlines for information and support | If you are in immediate crisis or feel unsafe, call 911.
201 Presidents Circle Room 201SLC UT 84112801.581.7200
Privacy Policy  |  Disclaimer  |  Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Select PageReportingReporting Sexual MisconductTitle IX (On-Campus) ReportingReporting to the PoliceMandatory ReportersConfidential ReportingDefinitionsGet InvolvedEducational ResourcesVolunteerStudent GroupsGet HelpMedical ResourcesCounseling & SupportHow to help a friendCrisisSecondary Survivors
People use a lot of different words to describe harm in relationships—intimate partner violence, interpersonal violence and domestic violence. No matter what you call it, the University of Utah is committed to ending sexual misconduct and supporting survivors. This website seeks to provide accurate and comprehensive information regarding the reporting process and available resources for students, faculty and staff.
Need immediate help? Find 24-hour resources for survivors of sexual violence here.
Find on- and off-campus resources, including counseling, advocacy, education and more.
Learn about the reporting processes on- and off-campus. Know your options for confidentiality.
Learn about the words and phrases associated with sexual misconduct.
Has someone you know been sexually assaulted? Learn about your options and how to respond.
Want to support survivors and end sexual violence? Discover how to make a difference on campus.
24-hour hotlines for information and support | If you are in immediate crisis or feel unsafe, call 911.
201 Presidents Circle Room 201SLC UT 84112801.581.7200
Privacy Policy  |  Disclaimer  |  Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
This form may be used to report incidents of discrimination, harassment, sex/gender discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault and other forms of sexual misconduct that you believe are in violation of University of Utah policy. This form may also be used to report issues of violation of the university’s youth protection policies. Reporting DOES NOT constitute filing a formal complaint. The affected party will be contacted to be given options for how they wish to proceed, including filing a formal complaint if applicable.
You may also call us at 801-581-8365 or email us at
Can I fill out this form anonymously?Yes, however, the University may be limited in the amount of follow up that can be provided if there is insufficient information.
Who can use this form?Anyone wishing to communicate to the university on your own behalf or on behalf of another person. All faculty and staff -- except those with a legal privilege such as mental health counselors and chaplains -- are mandatory reporters and must report allegations of discrimination, including sexual harassment, sexual assault and other forms of sexual misconduct.
What happens after I fill out this form?Information on this form is sent to Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA). If you provide contact information, an employee of the OEO/AA will follow up with you.
Is the information on this form confidential?No. Students, staff or faculty who would like to speak with someone confidentially should contact the Victim Advocates (801) 581-7776. Students may contact the Counseling Center (801) 581-6826, or the Women's Resource Center (801-581-8030). Information provided on this form is private and will be shared only with people who need to know.
What if someone retaliates against me for reporting?University policy prohibits retaliation for engaging in activities protected under the University’s Nondiscrimination Policy. This means that no person may intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any individual for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege protected under this Policy or because the individual has made a report or complaint, testified, assisted, or participated or refused to participate in any manner in an investigation proceeding or hearing under this Policy or its associated Regulations. Please contact the OEO/AA if you believe you have experienced retaliation for having filed a report.
Are you reporting Discrimination, Retaliation, or Sexual Misconduct?Please select...
What type of Discrimination are you reporting? Select all that applyPlease select...
What type of Sexual Misconduct are you reporting? Select all that applyPlease select...
When did this incident take place? Please be as specific as you can.
If you don't have a specific date or time, please describe when the incident occurred.
Where did this incident take place? Please be as specific as you can.
If you don't have a specific location, please describe the location where the incident occurred.
Incident Description - Please provide as many details as you can regarding the incident, and any other information that could is relevant to this issue.
Please share the name(s) of the person engaging in the misbehavior (Respondent), if you feel comfortable
Respondent Information (The person who engaged in the misconduct)
Respondent's first name.  Enter "unknown" if this is not known.
First name of the person who engaged in the misconduct
Respondent's last name.  Enter "unknown" if this is not known.
Last name of the person who engaged in the misconduct
Complainant Information (the person who experienced the misconduct)
Complainant's first name.  Enter "unknown" if this is not known.
First Name of the person who experienced the misconduct
Complainant's last name.  Enter "unknown" if this is not known.
Last name of the person who experienced the misconduct
The University may be limited in its ability to follow up without sufficient information.
Are you a student, faculty member, staff, or other?
Sexual Misconduct - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
University of Utah policy prohibits sex discrimination, which includes sexual misconduct.
Sexual Misconduct is the most egregious form of sex discrimination. Title IX of the
Education Amendments Act of 1972 is the comprehensive federal law that prohibits discrimination
on the basis of sex in any federally funded education program or activity.
Policies, procedures, and resources are in place to take immediate and appropriate
steps to remedy violations of University policy and the university will take steps
to end or eliminate the hostile environment, prevent its recurrence and to remedy
the effects, as appropriate under each individual’s circumstances.
Complaints of sexual misconduct should be made directly to the Office of Equal Opportunity
Please see the Title IX Coordinator Outreach letter to learn about your specific rights to seek out Supportive Measures and options for
accountability through the OEO/AA process or through law enforcement.
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112Phone: 801-581-8365Fax: 801-585-5746
As defined by University Rule, R1-012: Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Misconduct
is a broad term used to encompass a range of behaviors including Sexual or Gender-Based
Harassment, Intimate Partner Violence, Sexual Exploitation, Stalking, Nonconsensual
Sexual Contact, and Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration. Sexual Misconduct also includes
the crimes of dating violence, domestic violence, sexual assault and stalking as defined
by state and federal law. Sexual Misconduct is a form of Sex Discrimination. The following
definitions of prohibited conduct apply to University policies.
As defined by University Rule, R1-012, Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Harassment
means unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical
conduct of a sexual nature or based on an individual’s sex, sexual orientation, gender,
Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition
of an individual’s employment, education, living environment, health care or participation
Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for
or a factor in decisions affecting that individual’s employment, education, living
environment, or participation in a university program or activity; or
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of interfering with an individual’s employment
or educational performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment
for that individual’s employment, education, living environment, or participation
Consent means affirmative, unambiguous, and voluntary agreement. For a nonexhaustive
list of situations in which consent has not been given, see Utah Code Ann. 76-5-406.
means actual or threatened physical violence, intimidation, or other forms of physical
or sexual abuse that would cause a reasonable person to fear harm to self or others.
For this policy, “intimate relationship” means marriage, domestic partnership, engagement,
casual or serious romantic involvement, and dating, whether in a current or former
relationship. Intimate Partner Violence can occur between persons of any sex, sexual
orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, and it can occur in any
type of intimate relationship including monogamous, non-committed, and relationships
involving more than two partners. Intimate Partner Violence can be a single act or
a pattern of behavior. Intimate Partner Violence is sometimes referred to as, and
includes behaviors that would be considered, dating violence, domestic violence, or
relationship abuse. Examples of Intimate Partner Violence include, but are not limited
to, situations in which the following behaviors are directed toward a partner in a
current or former intimate relationship: hitting, kicking, strangling, or other violence;
property damage; and threat of violence to one’s self, one’s partner, or the family
members, friends, pets, or personal property of the partner. Intimate Partner Violence
means any physical contact with another person of a sexual nature without that person’s
Consent. The touching of a person’s intimate parts (such as genitalia, groin, breast,
buttocks, mouth, or clothing covering same); touching a person with one’s own intimate
parts; or forcing a person to touch another’s intimate parts would be violations of
this policy if they occur without Consent. Nonconsensual Sexual Contact is a form
means the sexual penetration of any bodily opening with any object or body part without
Consent. This could be committed by force, threat, intimidation, or through exploitation of
another’s mental or physical condition (such as lack of consciousness, incapacitation
due to drugs or alcohol, age, or disability) of which the Respondent was actually
aware or which a reasonable person in the Respondent’s position should have been aware.
Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
means treating someone differently, i.e., disadvantaging the person, on the basis
of sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression when:
such conduct adversely affects a term or condition of an individual’s employment,
education, living environment, or participation in a University program or activity;
a person’s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity or expression is used
as the basis for or a factor in decisions affecting that individual’s employment,
education, living environment, health care, or participation in a University program
means any physical sexual act perpetrated against a person’s will or where a person
is incapable of giving consent (e.g., due to age or use of drugs or alcohol, or because
an intellectual or other disability prevents the person from having the capacity to
means engaging in a course of conduct directed at a specific person and based on that’s
person’s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, that
would cause a reasonable person to fear for the person’s safety or the safety of others
or suffer substantial emotional distress. Stalking is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
Discussion of issues or theories relating to sexuality or gender in an academic or
professional setting, when appropriate to subject matter, will be presumed not to
constitute sexual harassment even if it offends or embarrasses an individual unless
other factors are involved. Such factors include targeting the discussion to an individual
or carrying out the discussion in terms that are both patently unnecessary and gratuitously
Under university policy, most University employees are required to report situations
involving sexual misconduct and discrimination to the Office of Equal Opportunity
Some situations may be very personal; we respect your privacy and will protect it
in accordance with University of Utah policy and FERPA. Although information about
the situation may be reported to the OEO/AA, you have the right to choose to whom
you speak, what you say, when you say it and what resources you use. If you prefer
to speak first with a confidential resource (confidential resources are not required
to report information to the OEO/AA, you may contact one of the groups below.
Information provided to OEO/AA is considered private information and will only be shared with other appropriate university personnel on
A collection of sites and areas containing additional information
Information about Sexual Assault Awareness & Response Support
Office of Equal Opportunity,  Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
The Cost of Reporting: Perpetrator Retaliation, Institutional Betrayal, and Student Survivor Pushout
Under Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972:
No person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving federal financial assistance.
Essentially, Title IX prohibits sex discrimination in educational institutions that receive federal funding (the vast majority of schools). While Title IX is a very short statute, Supreme Court decisions and guidance from the U.S. Department of Education have given it a broad scope covering sexual harassment and sexual violence. Under Title IX, schools are legally required to respond and remedy hostile educational environments and failure to do so is a violation that means a school could risk losing its federal funding.
While Title IX was previously a powerful tool to stop sexual violence and harassment in schools, On August 14th, 2020, the Department’s new Title IX rule went into effect. Make no mistake: the Rule drastically rolls back protections for student survivors and makes it easier for schools to sweep sexual harassment under the rug. Visit our Hands off IX resources and toolkit to learn more about your rights in light of the rule and how you hold school administrations accountable.
The below resources are intended to help you determine if your school is in compliance with Title IX. Although these resources have been written with the guidance of legal experts, we are not lawyers, and the information on this website does not constitute legal advice. We encourage you to contact a lawyer to discuss your complaint or suit.
Under Title IX, schools must disseminate a notice of nondiscrimination. This notice does not have to specify that sexual harassment and violence are likewise prohibited, but the U.S. Department of Education (ED) recommends that schools do, since a notice that makes it unclear may qualify as a violation of Title IX. This notice is likely available in a student handbook or code of conduct in elementary and secondary schools and in an Annual Security Report (ASR) in higher education institutions.
This notice prohibiting sex discrimination must be widely distributed, available, and easily accessible to the school community each year. ED recommends schools:
Publish this policy online and have it available in print across campus so that school members may understand its purpose and utility
Include enough detail in the policy so that members of the community can realize sexual harassment and sexual violence are prohibited forms of sex discrimination
Title IX rule requires every educational institution receiving federal funding to have a Title IX Coordinator. The contact information (name/title, office address, telephone number, email address) of the Coordinator should be available both in your school’s nondiscrimination notice, but also in an annual security report or higher education institutions. Both victims and third parties should contact the Coordinator to report incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, or sexual violence.
The Title IX Coordinator ensures schools are compliant with Title IX, coordinates the investigation and disciplinary process, and looks for patterns or systematic problems with compliance to ensure schools fulfill all their federal obligations. The Coordinator may not have any other job responsibility that creates a conflict of interest with their responsibilities under Title IX. For example, the Title IX coordinator may not also sit on a disciplinary board or serve as legal counsel to the college.
When a school does not have a Title IX Coordinator or list that individual’s contact information, then your college is non-compliant with Title IX.
If the Coordinator has another job responsibility that creates conflicts of interest, your school is likely in violation of Title IX.
Schools are required to adopt and publish a grievance procedure outlining the complaint, investigation, and disciplinary process for addressing sex discrimination, sexual harassment, and sexual violence occurring within “education program or activity” which the Department states “includes locations, events, or circumstances over which the recipient exercised substantial control over both the respondent and the context in which the sexual harassment occurs, and also includes any building owned or controlled by a student organization that is officially recognized by a post-secondary institution.” This process should address discrimination perpetrated by students, employees, or third parties, but only if the respondent is currently enrolled or employed by the school. Additionally, school security and/or law enforcement personnel must notify survivors  of their rights to use the school’s grievance procedure in addition to being able to file a criminal complaint.
This grievance procedure requires the school’s process be “prompt and equitable,” meaning it must be a timely response to discrimination and provide both parties equivalent rights during the disciplinary process rather than having one-sided due process.t.
Where the Rule falls short, states and schools must implement policies to uphold students’ right to a timely and trauma-informed investigation, written or electronic notes of any meeting, and a review of all available and relevant evidence.
While sexual misconduct complaints may be resolved through informal mechanisms, such as mediation, students are not required to use informal methods of grievance resolution and should not be pressured into such a process.
In addition to being obligated to survivors, schools must address hostile educational environments created by sex discrimination, sexual harassment, and sexual violence school-wide. Addressing a hostile environment means remedying a current situation, addressing its effects, and preventing its recurrence in the future. Schools may meet this obligation through providing educational and awareness programming on sexual harassment or discrimination.
Employee Training: Both the Clery Act and Title IX rule require school employees that address sexual violence complaints to have appropriate training. The U.S. Department of Education (ED) also recommends that professors, campus police, administrators, counselors, health center staff, cleaning staff, coaches, resident advisers and others likely to receive reports be trained on how to identify and report sexual harassment and violence.
According to the Department of Education, schools need to:
Ensure that responsible employees with the authority to address sexual violence know how to respond appropriately to reports of sexual violence; that other responsible employees know that they are obligated to report sexual violence to appropriate school officials; and that all other employees understand how to respond to reports of sexual violence.
Make sure professional counselors, pastoral counselors, and non-professional counselors or advocates understand the extent to which they may keep a report confidential.
Provide training to all employees likely to witness or receive reports of sexual violence, including teachers, professors, school law enforcement unit employees, school administrators, school counselors, general counsels, athletic coaches, health personnel, and resident advisors.
A school also should train responsible employees to inform students of:
The reporting obligations of responsible employees;
Students’ option to request confidentiality and available confidential advocacy, counseling, or other support services; and
Their right to file a Title IX complaint with the school and to report a crime to campus or local law enforcement.
While sexual misconduct complaints may be resolved through informal mechanisms, such as mediation, students are not required to use informal methods of grievance resolution and should not be pressured into such a process.
In addition to being obligated to survivors, schools must address hostile educational environments created by sex discrimination, sexual harassment, and sexual violence school-wide. Addressing a hostile environment means remedying a current situation, addressing its effects, and preventing its recurrence in the future. Schools may meet this obligation through providing educational and awareness programming on sexual harassment or discrimination.
Employee Training: Both the Clery Act and Title IX Guidance require school employees that address sexual violence complaints to have appropriate training. The U.S. Department of Education (ED) also recommends that professors, campus police, administrators, counselors, health center staff, cleaning staff, coaches, resident advisers and others likely to receive reports be trained on how to identify and report sexual harassment and violence.
According to the Department of Education, schools need to:
Ensure that responsible employees with the authority to address sexual violence know how to respond appropriately to reports of sexual violence; that other responsible employees know that they are obligated to report sexual violence to appropriate school officials; and that all other employees understand how to respond to reports of sexual violence.
Make sure professional counselors, pastoral counselors, and non-professional counselors or advocates understand the extent to which they may keep a report confidential.
Provide training to all employees likely to witness or receive reports of sexual violence, including teachers, professors, school law enforcement unit employees, school administrators, school counselors, general counsels, athletic coaches, health personnel, and resident advisors.
A school also should train responsible employees to inform students of:
The reporting obligations of responsible employees;
Students’ option to request confidentiality and available confidential advocacy, counseling, or other support services; and
Their right to file a Title IX complaint with the school and to report a crime to campus or local law enforcement.
Schools are required to be prompt when receiving a complaint of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, or sexual violence in order to remedy any hostile educational environment created by such behaviors. ED has not provided details on the length of time they consider to be “prompt,” but will evaluate a school’s effort to conduct a fair, impartial investigation in a timely manner. If the length of your investigation has impeded on your access to an education and further created a hostile environment you may have grounds for an OCR complaint. A simultaneous police investigation does not remove a school’s responsibility to resolve a complaint under Title IX. While a school may delay its response to accommodate a police investigation, schools that delay the Title IX complaint process unreasonably are in violation of Title IX."
Reporting Options:Title IX Guidance reminded schools that they have an obligation under the Clery Act to inform victims of their reporting options. Schools must notify victims of their right to report to police and facilitate that process if desired by the victim. Victims also have the right not to report to the police.
Regardless of a victim’s choice to report to the police, a victim may use a school’s grievance procedure to address sexual harassment or sexual violence or merely seek accommodations. When reasonable, schools must accommodate a victim on campus to remedy a hostile environment on a school’s campus. This means schools may change academic or extracurricular schedules to prevent an ongoing hostile education environment or put in place safety measures, such as a no-contact directive or facilitate a student obtaining a restraining order. The burden of accommodations or safety measures should not be solely placed on the victim, as this may be seen as a violation of Title IX."
Reporting Options:Title IX Guidance reminded schools that they have an obligation under the Clery Act to inform victims of their reporting options. Schools must notify victims of their right to report to police and facilitate that process if desired by the victim. Victims also have the right not to report to the police.
Regardless of a victim’s choice to report to the police, a victim may use a school’s grievance procedure to address sexual harassment or sexual violence or merely seek accommodations. When reasonable, schools must accommodate a victim on campus to remedy a hostile environment on a school’s campus. This means schools may change academic or extracurricular schedules to prevent an ongoing hostile education environment or put in place safety measures, such as a no-contact directive or facilitate a student obtaining a restraining order. The burden of accommodations or safety measures should not be solely placed on the victim, as this may be seen as a violation of Title IX."
Equitable Complaint Processes: Under Title IX, both the accuser and accused have equal rights, such as the right to:
Have an adviser of choice present during the process (this includes an attorney if allowed at all by schools)
Present evidence or have witnesses speak on their behalf
Have timely access to information that will be used at the hearing
Be present at pre-hearing meetings that provide an opportunity to present their testimony
Receive the final hearing decision in writing at the same time as the other party without being required to sign a non-disclosure agreement
Have the right to appeal a final decision (The 2017 Interim Guidance states that a school may choose to allow appeals solely by the responding party or by both parties. Learn more.)
In addition, since Title IX is a federal civil right, the appropriate standard of evidence is a “preponderance of the evidence.” This standard of evidence means that a hearing must determine whether a complaint of sex discrimination is “more likely than not” to have occurred or 51% likely to have occurred. This standard applies for all complaints of sex discrimination, including sexual harassment and violence, because Title IX outlines standards for school disciplinary processes — not criminal complaints, which require the highest standard of evidence, “beyond a reasonable doubt.”
The 2017 Interim Guidance allows schools to use the “clear and convincing” evidence standard, but only if all other forms of campus misconduct investigations utilize this standard.
Retaliation:As a federal civil right, Title IX automatically protects any individual who reports sex discrimination, sexual harassment, or sexual violence against retaliation. This means employees and third party reports are protected along with reporting victims from any adverse consequence, harassment, intimidation, or discrimination that is causally related to reporting sex discrimination under Title IX. Schools must protect against other employees or students retaliating against a reporting party when it “knows or should know” about the retaliatory harassment or behavior.
If a school discourages or threatens you about discussing complaints of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, or sexual violence, this may be considered retaliation.
Donate to Know Your IX today to support our efforts to empower students on campuses across the country. Your donations come to our sponsoring organization, Advocates for Youth, www.advocatesforyouth.org.
Rule 1-012B: Sexual Misconduct Complaint Process Rule - Regulations Library - The
Career-line, Adjunct, and Visiting (CAV) Faculty Review S
Current Page: Rule 1-012B: Sexual Misconduct Complaint Process Rule
[Interim] Rule 1-012B: Sexual Misconduct Complaint Process Rule.
The University of Utah (“University”) is committed to providing and fostering an environment
that is safe and free from Sexual or Gender-Based Harassment and Discrimination. Among
other forms of prohibited Discrimination, University Policy prohibits Discrimination
on the basis of sex, which includes all forms of Sexual Misconduct. University Policy
also prohibits Retaliation against individuals for engaging in protected activities,
such as filing a Discrimination Complaint or participating in a Discrimination Complaint
This rule outlines the process the University will use to resolve Complaints of Sexual
Misconduct. This rule is also intended to educate the University community, including
current students, prospective students and employees, about Sexual Misconduct and
about campus resources and processes available to victim-survivors of Sexual Misconduct.
For purposes of Policy 1-012 and its associated Rules and Guideline, including this Rule 1-012B, the definitions
of prohibited Discrimination and other words and phrases are provided in Rule 1-012.
Prevention and Awareness. The University offers comprehensive programing intended to end Dating Violence, Domestic
Violence, Sexual Assault, and Stalking. The University provides education and training
designed to raise awareness of these issues and engages in efforts that aim to reduce
harm, improve communication skills, foster healthy relationships, improve bystander
intervention skills, and educate the campus community on the definitions of Consent,
Sexual Assault, Domestic Violence, Dating Violence, and Stalking through orientations
each semester given to incoming students. The University of Utah Department of Public
Safety (“UDPS”) offers sexual assault education and information programs to University
students and employees upon request. Literature on date rape education, risk reduction,
and University response, as well as educational programs about the same, are available
through various University Student Affairs offices including the Office of Housing
& Residential Education and through the University's Center for Student Wellness.
The University provides primary prevention and awareness programs for incoming students
and new employees, and ongoing programs for students, staff, and faculty which includes:
a statement that the University prohibits the offenses of Domestic Violence, Dating
the Utah statutory definitions of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault,
the Utah statutory definitions of consent, in reference to sexual activity;
safe and positive options for bystander intervention that may be carried out by an
individual to prevent harm or intervene when there is a risk of Domestic Violence,
information on risk reduction to recognize warning signs of abusive behavior, information
for those who may be at risk to perpetrate harm, and how to avoid potential attacks;
definitions of Sexual Misconduct under University Policy, as well as a copy of University
Policy 1-012, Rules 1-012, 1-012A, and 1-012B, and Guidline 1-012.
Initial Response. The first priority of any person who has been subject to Sexual Violence should be
to get to a safe place and then obtain necessary medical treatment and emotional support.
Victim-survivors may seek and receive a medical forensic examination free of charge
from a local hospital emergency department without submitting a police report. The
University strongly encourages victim-survivors to report all incidents of Sexual
Misconduct as soon as possible. Time is a critical factor for evidence collection
Role of Law Enforcement. The victim-survivor of an incident of Sexual Violence (rape,
fondling, incest, statutory rape), Dating Violence, Domestic Violence and Stalking
is encouraged, but not required, to report the incident directly to the University
Department of Public Safety (“UDPS”) or the local law enforcement entity for the jurisdiction
Alternatively, or in conjunction with a report to law enforcement, victim-survivors
may make a report to the Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)
(see Section (III)(C)), the Office of the Dean of Students, a Housing & Residential
Education representative, and/or another University representative. Filing a police
report will not obligate the victim-survivor to pursue a complaint through the criminal
ensure the victim-survivor receives appropriate medical treatment, including a medical
provides the opportunity for collection of evidence helpful in prosecution, which
cannot be obtained later (ideally, a victim-survivor of Sexual Violence should not
wash, use the toilet, or change clothing prior to a medical forensic exam); and
provide the victim-survivor with available resources, including supportive resources.
A victim-survivor may request any University representative to assist them in notifying
law enforcement authorities about an incident of Sexual Violence (rape, fondling,
incest, statutory rape) Dating Violence, Domestic Violence, Stalking and any other
When a victim-survivor contacts the UDPS, the UDPS will notify the Title IX Coordinator,
the OEO/AA, and the Office of the Dean of Students (if related to a student). A victim-
survivor may choose for an investigation to be pursued either through the criminal
justice system, through this rule, or both. Victim-survivors may also choose not to
proceed in the criminal justice system or under this rule (subject to Section (III)(D)
of this rule). A representative from the Center for Student Wellness Victim-Survivor
Advocacy program, Chief Safety Office Community Services Division, UDPS, the Office
of the Dean of Students, the Title IX Coordinator, and/or the OEO/AA will guide the
Where applicable, UDPS will enforce orders of protection, no contact orders, restraining
orders, civil stalking injunctions, or similar lawful orders issued by a criminal,
Role of the OEO/AA. The OEO/AA is the University department charged with responding to reports and investigating
Formal Complaints of Discrimination, including Sexual Misconduct.
The Director of the OEO/AA serves as the University’s Title IX Coordinator.
Sherrie Hayashi Director, Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action Title
IX/ADA/Section 504 Coordinator University of Utah 383 University Street, Level 1,
Suite OEO, Salt Lake City, UT 84112 Phone: (801) 581-8365 Fax: (801) 585-5746 oeo@utah.edu www.oeo.utah.edu
Upon receipt of a report of alleged Sexual Misconduct, Complainants will promptly
receive information from the Title IX Coordinator that:
provides the Complainant with written notification of and assist the Complainant in
accessing counseling, mental health and healthcare, victim advocacy, legal, academic
support, and other resources available in the community and on-campus;
offers and discusses Supportive Measures with or without the filing of a Formal Complaint;
considers the Complainant's wishes with respect to Supportive Measures;
explains the process for filing a Formal Complaint; and
informs the Complainant of the right to report a crime to campus or local law enforcement
and provide the Complainant with assistance, if requested.
Confidentiality.1 The University encourages victim-survivors of Sexual Misconduct to talk to someone
about what happened. Different employees on campus have different requirements to
Completely Confidential. Professional and pastoral counselors are completely confidential,
except any reporting required by state and federal law, and do not report any information
disclosed by a Complainant to the University or to the OEO/AA.
Limited Confidentiality. Nonprofessional counselors and advocates (e.g., individuals
who are not professional counselors and who work or volunteer, including front desk staff
and students, in the University Counseling Center, Center for Student Wellness, Center
for Student Wellness Victim-Survivor Advocacy program, Ombuds Office, or counseling
services in the Women’s Resource Center, must report only general information about
crimes required to be reported under the Clery Act to the Chief Safety Office — such
as the nature, date, time, and general location of the incident—in a way that does
Clery Reporting Requirements. Under the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) and the
Clery Act, the University is required to complete publicly available record- keeping
on crimes required to be reported by the Clery Act in accordance with federal law,
but will not disclose identifying information. The University will maintain as confidential
any Protective Measures provided to the victim-survivor, to the extent that maintaining
such confidentiality would not impair the ability of the institution to provide the
Confidential Resources. The following are resources are confidential. *These offices must report general information about crimes reportable under the
Clery Act to the Chief Safety Office in a way that does not identify the individuals involved, such as the nature, date, time, and general location of
the incident. This information is required to be included in the University’s Annual
Security Report under the Clery Act, and in rare circumstances may result in the issuance
of a timely warning or other University obligations under Clery/VAWA.
Student Services Building201 S 1640 E, Room 426Salt Lake City, UT 84112(801) 581-682624-hour Crisis Line: (801) 587-3000
University of Utah Hospital 50 N. Medical DriveSalt Lake City, UT 84132(801) 213-2484
Eccles Student Life Center1836 Student Life Way, Suite 2100Salt Lake City, UT 84112(801) 581-7776
Student Services Building201 S 1460 E, Room 330Salt Lake City, UT 84112 (801) 581-7779advocate@sa.utah.edu
Women’s Resource Center (counseling services only)*
A. Ray Olpin Union200 S. Central Campus Drive, Room 411 Salt Lake City, UT 84112(801) 581-8030
The Psychology and Wellness Program Student Athlete Support Services (SASS) Department
HPER East Pavilion, Room 113Salt Lake City, UT 84112
Health Science Office:Health Sciences Education Building Fifth Floor, Suite 551526 South 2000 EastSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-585-6283facultyombudsman@hsc.utah.edu
Campus Office:Office Locations:1738G Marriott Library3245 Eccles Institute of Human Genetics OfficePhone: 801.585.3482Fax: 801.581.4233ombudsman@utah.edu
A Mandatory Reporter must promptly report to the Title IX Coordinator all relevant
details about the alleged Sexual Misconduct shared by a Complainant—including the
names of the Complainant and alleged Respondent(s), any witnesses, and any other relevant
facts, including the date, time and specific location of the alleged incident.
Before a Complainant reveals any information to a Mandatory Reporter, the Mandatory
Reporter should ensure that the Complainant understands the Mandatory Reporter's reporting
obligations. If the Complainant wants to maintain confidentiality, the Mandatory Reporter
should direct the Complainant to confidential resources.
If the Complainant wants to tell the Mandatory Reporter what happened but also requests
confidentiality, requests that no investigation occur, or requests that no action
be taken against the Respondent, the Mandatory Reporter should tell the Complainant
that the University will consider the request, but cannot guarantee that the University
Requests for Confidentiality. If a Complainant discloses an incident to a Mandatory Reporter but wishes to maintain
confidentiality, or requests that no investigation into a particular incident be conducted
or disciplinary action taken, the University must weigh that request against the University’s
obligation to provide a safe, non-discriminatory environment for all students, including
The University has designated the Title IX Coordinator to evaluate requests for allegations
If the University determines that it cannot maintain a Complainant’s confidentiality,
the University will inform the Complainant prior to starting an investigation and
will, to the extent possible, only share information with people responsible for handling
Supportive Measures. When the University receives information about alleged Sexual Misconduct, an appropriate
University representative (such as the Dean of Students, cognizant supervisor, or
Human Resources (HR) representative) may offer Supportive Measures to either or both
parties which will generally remain in effect throughout and potentially beyond the
duration of the University investigation. Supportive Measures will be offered under
the auspices of the Title IX Coordinator; University representatives should consult
with the Title IX Coordinator in offering any Supportive Measures. The University
will offer Supportive Measures if they are reasonably available, regardless of whether
the Complainant chooses to file a complaint with the OEO/AA or with law enforcement.
Because the University is under a continuing obligation to address the issue of Sexual
Misconduct campus-wide, reports of Sexual Misconduct (including non-identifying reports)
will also prompt the University to consider broader remedial action.
Amnesty. An individual who makes a good faith report of Sexual Harassment or Sexual Misconduct
that was directed at them or another person will not be sanctioned for a violation
related to the use of drugs or alcohol that is related to the report.
Non-Disclosure of Information. Parties will be provided evidence obtained by the OEO/AA as part of the investigation
that is directly related to the allegations raised in the Formal Complaint (the "Evidence");
the parties and party advisors must keep all such evidence strictly confidential and
use such evidence solely for the purposes of participating in the Sexual Misconduct
investigation and grievance process. Parties who disseminate or use such evidence
for any other purpose may be subject to discipline.
OEO/AA Investigation. In cases of Sexual Misconduct, the OEO/AA will begin an investigation upon acceptance
of a Formal Complaint. The University will not require a Complainant to participate
in any investigation or disciplinary proceeding; however, failure to participate may
Upon acceptance of a Formal Complaint, the OEO/AA will provide written notice:
to the appropriate University administrator, which may include the supervisor, Chair,
Dean, and/or cognizant Vice President with responsibility over the Respondent and
If the Respondent is a student, the Vice President for Student Affairs and the Office
If the Respondent is a Vice President, another Vice President will be selected as
the cognizant Vice President for purposes of this rule.
the applicable policies and associated rules by which the proceedings will be governed;
sufficient details of the allegations including the identities of the parties involved,
the date and location of the alleged incident(s), and the conduct allegedly constituting
a statement that each party will have an equal opportunity to submit and review evidence
a statement that the Respondent is presumed not responsible for the alleged conduct
until a determination is made at the conclusion of the grievance process;
a statement informing the Complainant and Respondent that they may have one advisor
of their choice, who may be, but is not required to be an attorney and one Support
that Rule 1-012(III)(D)(10) prohibits knowingly making false statements or knowingly
submitting false statements during the grievance process.
If, during the course of the investigation, allegations arise about the Complainant
or Respondent that were not included in the initial notice, the OEO/AA will provide
notice of the additional allegations and provide the Respondent with an opportunity
The Respondent shall be afforded a full opportunity to respond to the allegations
contained in the Complaint. Failure to respond or participate in an interview by the
Respondent or a witness will not prevent the completion of the investigation.
The OEO/AA will not draw an inference about the determination of responsibility based
solely on a party’s or witness’s decision not to participate in the investigative
or hearing process; however, evidence for review will be limited to that provided
by parties and witnesses who participate in the investigation.
The OEO/AA shall interview the Complainant, the Respondent, and may interview any
other person with relevant information. The OEO/AA will objectively review all relevant
information, including that which is submitted by the parties.
The Complainant and the Respondent may each be accompanied at any meetings or interviews
with the OEO/AA by one advisor who may be, but does not have to be, an attorney. During
the investigation, the advisor may only advise the Complainant or Respondent and may
not actively participate. Prior to the hearing, any advisor is at the Complainant
The Complainant and the Respondent may each be accompanied at any meetings or interviews
by one Support Person. The Support Person's role is to provide support to the Complainant
or Respondent and cannot speak on behalf of the party.
At the conclusion of the investigation, the OEO/AA shall issue the draft of its investigative
report (“OEO Draft”) simultaneously to the parties and their advisors, if any, in
an electronic or hard copy format. The OEO Draft shall include:
an analysis of whether the evidence, evaluated under a Preponderance of the Evidence
standard, supports a recommendation that Sexual Misconduct occurred;
any evidence obtained as part of the investigation that is directly related to the
To protect the privacy of witnesses and all parties involved, and pursuant to Family
Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) and other state and federal privacy laws,
names and other personally identifiable information may be redacted from the copies
of the OEO Draft Report and the OEO Report that are provided to the Complainant and
Both parties shall have ten (10) calendar days after receipt of the OEO Draft Report
to submit written comments and any additional documents and/or evidence to the OEO/AA.
If information from either party raises new issues or allegations, the OEO/AA may
At the conclusion of the OEO/AA’s investigation, the OEO/AA shall issue a final investigative
report (“OEO Report”) simultaneously to the parties and their advisors, if any, and
the appropriate administrator with responsibility over the Respondent in an electronic
an analysis of whether the evidence, evaluated under a Preponderance of the Evidence
standard, supports a recommendation that Sexual Misconduct occurred;
any evidence obtained as part of the investigation that is directly related to the
Upon determining a recommended sanction, the appropriate administrator will provide
written notice of a recommended sanction to the parties, to the OEO/AA, and the Hearing
Coordinator, and to the cognizant Vice President with responsibility over the Respondent
and any others with a legitimate business need, contemporaneous with the OEO/AA issuing
At the conclusion of the investigation, the OEO/AA shall convene a Hearing Committee
(“Committee”). This Committee shall serve as the decision-maker with regard to the
allegations of Sexual Misconduct, any associated disciplinary sanction or other corrective
measures, and any remedies for the Complainant. The Committee shall make an independent
judgment in objectively evaluating relevant evidence to reach a determination regarding
responsibility, independent from the recommendation from the investigator or the appropriate
Hearings should take place as soon as practicable, but should be no less than fifteen
(15) and no more than forty (40) calendar days from the issuance of the OEO Report.
Although the OEO/AA Hearing Coordinator may endeavor to find a hearing date that will
be convenient for all the parties involved, the Hearing Coordinator and Committee
Chair have the final authority for determining the date of the hearing.
A Hearing Coordinator may facilitate the work of the Committee. Hearing Coordinator
notify the Complainant, the Respondent, the Committee, and the OEO/AA of the date
notify the Complainant and the Respondent of the names of the Committee members and
any witnesses requested by the Complainant, the Respondent, or the Committee;
notify persons requested by the Committee, Complainant, and/or Respondent to testify
at the hearing of the time and place of the hearing.
distribute the Hearing Procedure and any documentary evidence to the Complainant and
arrange for an electronic recording of the hearing; and
provide other reasonable support services at the Committee’s request.
provide the Committee with a copy OEO Report, the attachments (including a copy of
the complaint), and a list of the material witnesses identified in the OEO Report;
provide other reasonable investigatory and support services at the Committee’s request.
Appropriate Sanctioning Administrator responsibilities include:
provide the Committee with a recommended sanction, disciplinary action, or other corrective
Closed Hearing. Hearings shall be closed to the public.
Advisor. The Complainant and the Respondent may each be accompanied at the hearing
by one advisor of their choice, who may be an attorney and who may participate in
the hearing as provided in this Hearing Process. If a party does not have an advisor
present at the hearing, the University will provide, without fee or charge to that
party, an advisor of the University's choice to conduct cross-examination on behalf
Support Person. The Complainant and Respondent may each be accompanied at the hearing
by one Support Person of their choice, who may attend but not participate in the hearing.
Witnesses. The Committee, the Complainant, and the Respondent may request the appearance
of witnesses at the hearing. It is the responsibility of the party or the Committee
calling a particular witness to encourage that witness to attend the hearing.
Documentary Evidence. The Complainant and the Respondent may submit documentary evidence
for consideration by the Committee. The Committee may also request additional documentary
Rules of Evidence. The Committee shall not be bound by strict rules of legal evidence
or procedure and may consider any evidence it deems relevant.
Privacy. Committee Chairs and other Committee members are prohibited from discussing
any matter related to the hearing with the parties or the witnesses, or with others
before or after the hearing. Violation of privacy may result in dismissal from the
Electronic Hearings. Hearings shall be conducted remotely through electronic means,
instead of in- person, when at all possible. These remote hearings shall include audio
and video capabilities which will allow for parties to simultaneously see, hear, and
interact with the Committee, witnesses, and each- other in real-time as if physically
Recording of Hearings. The hearing, except for deliberations, shall be recorded and
a copy in electronic format shall be made available to either party upon request at
Failure of Party to Participate. In the event either party fails to attend the hearing
without prior notice to the Hearing Coordinator and good cause, the Committee may
proceed with the hearing. Neither party is required to participate in the hearing
in order for the hearing to proceed, subject to restrictions in Section (III)(I)(4).
Disruptive Behavior. The Committee has authority to exclude from the hearing any party,
advisor, or other participant whose behavior the Committee finds disruptive after
Time Allocation. Each party shall have up to forty- five (45) minutes for personal
and/or opening statements, presentation of evidence and questioning of witnesses,
and concluding remarks. The Committee Chair shall have discretion to grant extensions
Role of Office of General Counsel. The Office of General Counsel may provide a staff
attorney to be present at hearings in order to provide guidance to the Committee on
Sanctions and Remedies. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Committee shall determine
the appropriate sanctions and remedies. The Committee will ensure that any sanctions
and remedies are appropriate to end the prohibited conduct, to prevent further violation
The Committee will review the recommendation submitted by the appropriate administrator
and may call that individual as a witness during the hearing to speak to the reasoning
supporting the recommendation when making their decision. In determining the appropriate
sanction, the Committee shall consider the severity, persistence or pervasiveness
of the misconduct; the egregiousness of the misconduct, including the use of weapons,
drugs, or alcohol, if applicable; the impact of the misconduct on the Complainant;
the impact or implications of the misconduct on the University community, prior misconduct
by the Respondent, including the Respondent's relevant prior disciplinary history;
whether the Respondent has accepted responsibility for the misconduct; the maintenance
of a safe, nondiscriminatory and respectful working and learning environment; and
any other mitigating, aggravating or compelling factors.
If the Respondent is a student, the Office of the Dean of Students will recommend
to the Hearing Committee the disciplinary sanction or other corrective measures. Sanctions
or other corrective measures in cases of Sexual Misconduct are not subject to Policy
6- 400, Code of Student Rights and Responsibilities (“Student Code”) and may only be appealed under Policy 1- 012 and its associated regulations including
this Rule. Possible sanctions include, but are not limited to: fines, restitution,
warning, withholding diploma, organizational sanction, permanent no-contact directives,
educational training, referrals to counseling or behavioral coaching, limitations,
restrictions, or exclusion from campus or campus programs or activities, notation
on the student's transcript consistent with the Family Educational Rights and Privacy
Act, suspension from one semester to five years, dismissal from the University, or
If the Respondent is a staff member, the appropriate University administrator with
supervisory responsibility over the Respondent, in consultation with Human Resources,
will recommend to the Hearing Committee a disciplinary sanction or other corrective
measures. Sanctions or other corrective measures in cases of Sexual Misconduct are
not subject to Policy 5-203, Staff Employee Grievance Procedures, and may only be reviewed and/or appealed under Policy 1-012 and its associated regulations
including this Rule. Possible sanctions include, but are not limited, to: verbal counseling
or warning, extension of probationary period, reassignment, transfer, limitations,
restrictions, or exclusion from campus or campus programs or activities, reduction
in pay, written warning, final written warning, suspension without pay, demotion,
If the Respondent is a faculty member, the appropriate University administrator, such
as the faculty member’s Department Chair or Dean, in consultation with the cognizant
Vice President, will recommend to the Hearing Committee the disciplinary sanction
or other corrective action. Possible sanctions include, but are not limited, to: verbal
counseling or warning, limitations, restrictions, or exclusion from campus or campus
programs or activities, written reprimand, suspension without pay and dismissal (termination).
If the Respondent is a vendor/contractor/visitor/patient, possible sanctions or other
corrective measures include limitations, restrictions, or exclusion from all or part(s)
of campus or campus programs or activities and/or ending business relationships with
Remedies. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Committee shall make a determination
regarding any appropriate remedies for the Complainant, including but not limited
to: reinstatement, transfer or reassignment of employees, Supportive Measures, implementing
changes in programs and activities, providing training, or other remedies designed
to restore equal access to University Programs or Activities. The Title IX Coordinator
is responsible for effective implementation of any remedies.
The OEO/AA shall create a standing pool of committee members to hear and be the decision-
makers determining whether allegations of Sexual Misconduct violate University Policy.
The Hearing Committee will be the decision-maker with regard to a finding of responsibility
related to allegations of Sexual Misconduct and any resulting disciplinary sanction
or corrective measures. The pool of eligible Committee members includes the following:
staff employees of the University nominated by the Chief Human Resources Officer and/or
Staff Council and appointed by the University President and/or designee, and who will
students (graduate and/or undergraduate) nominated pursuant to procedures of Associated
Students of the University of Utah (ASUU) and/or the Office of the Dean of Students,
and appointed by the University President or designee, who will serve a one- year
faculty members from the Consolidated Hearing Committee pool.
The Committee shall be composed of a three-person panel selected from the pool of
The panel will consist of the Committee Chair, and one Committee member of the same
status as the Complainant (student, staff, or faculty), and one Committee member of
the same status as the Respondent (student, staff, or faculty), subject to the following
exceptions. In the interest of prompt resolution, a Committee may be convened without
student representation during school breaks or other time periods that present student
scheduling difficulties. No more than one student will serve on a Committee.
The Committee Chair will be selected from the pool of eligible committee members who
have previously served on a Committee and will receive specific training relevant
A Committee member may be disqualified due to bias, conflict of interest, or for other
good cause. Alternates will be appointed as needed.
In order to provide an objective and fair hearing, each Committee shall take precautions
against real or apparent conflicts of interest on the part of Committee members. Committee
members shall recuse themselves in any case in which they have a personal bias or
conflict of interest that would preclude their making a fair and objective decision
and shall avoid any individual communication with a party.
If there is a challenge to the participation of any Committee member, the remaining
Committee members shall hear that dispute and make a final decision about the participation
At least fifteen (15) calendar days before the hearing, the Hearing Coordinator shall
notify the Complainant and Respondent in writing, in either an electronic or hard
the date, time, location, participants, and purpose of the hearing;
the names of all witnesses that the Committee intends to call;
any additional documentary evidence that was not included in the OEO Report that the
of the applicable policies and associated rules and guidelines by which the proceedings
At least ten (10) calendar days before the hearing, the Complainant and the Respondent
of any request that a Committee member be disqualified based on bias or conflict of
the name and contact information of their selected advisor, if any;
the name and contact information of their selected Support Person, if any;
a list of any witnesses they wish to speak on their behalf as well as contact information
any additional documentary evidence to be submitted to the Committee, including
information the Committee has requested from the parties; and
any other requests for accommodations, including technological accommodations. The
request will be reviewed by Committee Chair and at the Chair's request, the Hearing
Coordinator will make any appropriate accommodations.
At least five (5) calendar days before the hearing, the Hearing Coordinator shall
notify the Complainant and Respondent in writing, in electronic or hard copy format:
provide copies of all evidence that has not already been provided; and
of any accommodations, including technological accommodations that will be made at
The OEO Consultant who conducted the investigation may be present at the hearing and
The Complainant and the Respondent shall each have an opportunity to make a personal
statement. The statement may describe the events that are the subject of the Complaint,
the personal impact of the alleged conduct, the relief sought, and any other relevant
information. In addition to the personal statements by the parties, each party’s advisor
shall have the opportunity to make an opening statement.
The Committee, Complainant, and the Respondent shall have the opportunity to call
The Committee may ask questions of the OEO Consultant, the Complainant, the Respondent,
and any witness. The time of Committee questions and answers shall not count against
Prior to any party or witness answering a question, the Committee Chair must first
determine whether such question is relevant and explain any decision to exclude a
question as not relevant. Only the person to whom a question is directed may answer
(i.e., an advisor shall not be permitted to answer the Committee’s questions on a
Questions and evidence about the Complainant’s sexual predispositions or prior sexual
behavior are not relevant, unless such questions and evidence are offered to prove
that someone other than the Respondent committed the conduct alleged by the Complainant;
if the questions and evidence concern specific incidents of the Complainant’s prior
sexual behavior with respect to the Respondent and are offered to prove Consent.
The Committee must permit each party's advisor to ask the OEO Consultant, the Complainant,
the Respondent, any witnesses, and any others providing testimony, all relevant questions
and follow-up questions, including questions challenging credibility. The cross-examination
of any person providing testimony (including the parties, witnesses, and the OEO Consultant)
shall be conducted directly, orally and in real time by the party’s advisor and not
by the party themselves and must be directed through the Committee Chair (not directly).
The Committee cannot draw an inference about the determination regarding responsibility
based solely on a party's or witnesses absence from the hearing or refusal to answer
The parties may also present other evidence. If a party presents documentary evidence
at the hearing that was not previously provided to the other party and or the Committee
prior to the hearing, the Committee Chair shall make a determination as to whether
Following the presentation of evidence, the Committee will then ask the appropriate
administrator (in cases where the Respondent is a student, a representative from the
Office of the Dean of Students; in cases where the Respondent is a staff employee,
a representative from the Human Resources department and/or the Respondent’s manager;
and, in cases where the Respondent is a faculty member, a representative from the
Office for Faculty and/or the Respondent’s Chair/Dean) to speak to the recommended
The Committee will conclude the hearing by providing an opportunity for the parties
to make concluding remarks. The Chair will then adjourn the hearing and begin Committee
Committee deliberations and voting shall be closed sessions from which all other persons
are excluded, except, at the Committee’s request, an advising attorney from the Office
of General Counsel. The advising attorney may remain present for deliberations but
shall have no vote. The Committee in its discretion may take votes openly or by secret
written ballot. A majority vote by the members of the Committee who attended the hearing
shall be required for decisions. The Committee Chair shall be entitled to vote on
all questions. The OEO/AA, including the Director, shall not participate in the Committee’s
When the Complainant is a patient, Section J above shall not apply and will be addressed
by the procedure outlined at http://healthcare.utah.edu/policies/discrimination.php.
In lieu of a live hearing, the parties may submit a written personal statement, and
submit relevant written questions they wish to be asked of the other party and/or
witnesses no later than three (3) calendar days prior to the designated date. The
Committee will ask those questions (along with any questions the Committee may have
for the parties and/or witnesses) in writing to the other party and/or witnesses and
shall provide each party with the answers and allow for limited follow-up questions
The Committee shall then meet on a designated date, no later than five (5) days following
the conclusion of the written question and answer period, to consider the evidence
Within ten (10) calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing, the Committee shall
provide its written determination (“Committee Report”) simultaneously to the parties,
their advisors, if any, and the OEO/AA. The Committee Report shall include:
identification of the allegations potentially constituting Sexual Misconduct;
a description of the procedural steps taken from the receipt of the Formal Complaint
conclusions regarding application of the relevant policies to the facts;
a statement of, and rationale for, the result as to each allegation including a determination
regarding responsibility and any disciplinary sanctions the Committee imposes on the
Respondent and whether remedies designed to restore or preserve equal access to the
University’s Program or Activity will be provided to the Complainant; and
the procedures and permissible bases for the parties to appeal.
The appealing party (whether student, staff, or faculty) must articulate the applicable
bases for their appeal, which must include at least one of the following:
a procedural irregularity that affected the outcome of the matter;
new evidence that was not reasonably available at the time the determination was made,
the Title IX Coordinator, investigator(s), or decision- maker(s) had a conflict of
interest or bias for or against complainants or Respondents generally or the individual
Complainant or Respondent that affected the outcome of the matter; and
the findings regarding responsibility and or the disciplinary sanction or corrective
The Hearing Coordinator must notify the other party in writing that an appeal has
Appeal procedures must be applied equally to both parties.
Each party may provide a written statement in support of, or challenging, the decision
within five (5) days of the notice that an appeal has been filed.
In cases where the either party is not a faculty member, the Complainant and the Respondent
may each appeal the decision of the Hearing Committee to the cognizant Vice President
or their designee by submitting a request in writing to the Hearing Coordinator within
five (5) calendar days of notice of the Hearing Committee’s decision. Failure to file
a timely written request for appeal shall constitute a waiver of the right to an appeal
under this section. If there is no timely written request for an appeal, the Hearing
Committee’s decision shall become the final and binding decision of the University
The Vice President or their designee shall have available for review all relevant
documentation, including the Committee Report, any other materials presented to the
Committee, the statements or the parties supporting or opposing the appeal, and if
requested by the Vice President or their designee, a recording of the proceedings.
The Vice President or their designee may not base a decision on information not presented
at the hearing unless the nature of that information is fairly communicated to the
parties and a reasonable opportunity to respond is given. The Vice President or their
designee may seek advice from neutral advisors; and
The Vice President or their designee will issue a final and binding decision (“Final
Result”) in writing within ten (10) calendar days of the written request for appeal.
The written decision will describe the result of the appeal and the rationale for
the result. For good cause, the Vice President or their designee may extend the ten-day
period. The Vice President or designee shall simultaneously notify the parties, their
advisors, if any, and the supervisor, Dean, Chair, and any other cognizant University
In cases where either party is a faculty member, the Complainant and the Respondent
may each appeal the decision of the Hearing Committee to the President or their designee
instead of the Vice President, by submitting a request in writing to the Hearing Coordinator
within five (5) calendar days of notice of the Hearing Committee’s decision. Failure
to file a timely written request for appeal shall constitute a waiver of the right
to an appeal under this section. If there is no timely written request for an appeal,
the Hearing Committee’s decision shall become the final and binding decision of the
On appeal, the President or their designee shall have available for review all relevant
documentation, including the Committee Report, any other materials presented to the
Committee, and if requested by the President, an audio recording of the proceedings.
The President may not base a decision on information not presented at the hearing
unless the nature of that information is fairly communicated to the parties and a
reasonable opportunity to respond is given. The President may seek advice from neutral
The President or their designee will issue a final and binding decision (“Final Result”)
in writing within ten (10) calendar days of the written request for appeal. For good
cause, the President or their designee may extend the ten-day period. The Hearing
Coordinator shall concurrently notify the Complainant, the Respondent, and the supervisor,
Dean, Chair, and any other cognizant University representatives of the Final Result.
Training. All materials used to train Title IX Coordinators, investigators, Hearing Committee
members and other decision- makers, including any person who facilitates an Informal
Resolution process related to Sexual Harassment and the grievance process shall be
made publicly available on the OEO/AA website at oeo.utah.edu. Training materials
must not rely on sex/gender stereotypes and must promote impartial investigations
and adjudications of Formal Complaints of Sexual Harassment.
Title IX Coordinators, investigators, decision-makers and any person who facilitates
an Informal Resolution process will receive training on the definition of Sexual Harassment,
the scope of the University's Programs or Activities, how to conduct an investigation
and grievance process including hearings, appeals, Informal Resolution processes,
and how to serve impartially, including by avoiding prejudgment of the facts at issue,
Decision-makers will be trained on how to determine issues of relevance of questions
and evidence, including when questions and evidence about the complainant's sexual
predisposition or prior sexual behavior are not relevant, on evidentiary standards
Investigators will be trained on issues of relevance to create an investigative report
The Title IX Coordinator, hearing officers and other necessary parties will be trained
[Note: Parts IV-VII of this Regulation (and all other University Regulations) are Regulations
Resource Information – the contents of which are not approved by the Academic Senate
or Board of Trustees, and are to be updated from time to time as determined appropriate
by the cognizant Policy Officer and the Institutional Policy Committee, as per Policy
34 C.F.R. § 668.46 Institutional Security Policies and Crime Statistics
Utah Code Ann. § 76-5-106.5 Stalking—Definitions—Injunction—Penalties
Utah Code Ann. § 76-5-406 Sexual offense against the victim without consent of victim—Circumstances
Utah Code Ann. § 76-9-702.7 Voyeurism offenses—Penalties
Utah Board of Higher Education (formerly Board of Regents) Policy No. R256: Student Disciplinary Processes
Utah Board of Higher Education (formerly Board of Regents) Policy No. R831: Minimum Requirements for Non-Faculty Staff Employment
Utah Board of Higher Education (formerly Board of Regents) Policy No. R841: Minimum Requirements for Disciplinary Sanctions
Policy 1-004: Violence in the Workplace and Academic Environment
Rule 1-012B: Sexual Misconduct Complaint Process Rule
Policy 5-106: Equal Opportunity and Nondiscrimination Employment
Policy 1-020: Required Professional Boundaries in Relationships
Policy 5-117: Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy
Policy 6-011: Senate Consolidated Hearing Committee
Policy 6-316: Code of Faculty Rights and Responsibilities
Policy 6-400: Code of Student Rights and Responsibilities
The designated contact officials for this Policy are:
Policy Owner (primary contact person for questions and advice): Office of Equal Opportunity
These officials are designated by the University President or delegee, with assistance
of the Institutional Policy Committee, to have the following roles and authority,
"A "Policy Officer" will be assigned by the President for each University Policy,
and will typically be someone at the executive level of the University (i.e., the
President and Cabinet Officers). The assigned Policy Officer is authorized to allow
"The Policy Officer will identify an "Owner" for each Policy. The Policy Owner is
an expert on the Policy topic who may respond to questions about, and provide interpretation
of the Policy; and will typically be someone reporting to an executive level position
(as defined above), but may be any other person to whom the President or a Vice President
has delegated such authority for a specified area of University operations. The Owner
has primary responsibility for maintaining the relevant portions of the Regulations
Library. [and] bears the responsibility for determining which reference materials
are helpful in understanding the meaning and requirements of particular Policies..." University Rule 1- 001-III-B & E
Editorial revisions to current version: Updated March 17, 2022 to update OEO's address.
This Interim Rule Revision 1 was put into effect on August 20, 2020, by University
President Ruth Watkins, after consultation with the Academic Senate Executive Committee
July 13, 2020, and presentation to and approval of the Executive Committee of the
Board of Trustees August 17, 2020. It was subsequently presented for the Information
and Recommendations of the Academic Senate, August 31, 2020. It was enacted as an
Interim revision (in accord with Policy 1-001) in order to comply with recently changed
federal regulations. A permanent version is anticipated to be adopted by August 14,
2022 after review by appropriate internal University groups.
Revision 0. Approved by the Academic Senate: January 9, 2017.
Approved by the Board of Trustees: February 14, 2017, with the designated effective
201 Presidents Circle Rm 309Salt Lake City, UT 84112801-587-2357
Rule 1-012B: Sexual Misconduct Complaint Process Rule - Regulations Library - The
Career-line, Adjunct, and Visiting (CAV) Faculty Review S
Current Page: Rule 1-012B: Sexual Misconduct Complaint Process Rule
[Interim] Rule 1-012B: Sexual Misconduct Complaint Process Rule.
The University of Utah (“University”) is committed to providing and fostering an environment
that is safe and free from Sexual or Gender-Based Harassment and Discrimination. Among
other forms of prohibited Discrimination, University Policy prohibits Discrimination
on the basis of sex, which includes all forms of Sexual Misconduct. University Policy
also prohibits Retaliation against individuals for engaging in protected activities,
such as filing a Discrimination Complaint or participating in a Discrimination Complaint
This rule outlines the process the University will use to resolve Complaints of Sexual
Misconduct. This rule is also intended to educate the University community, including
current students, prospective students and employees, about Sexual Misconduct and
about campus resources and processes available to victim-survivors of Sexual Misconduct.
For purposes of Policy 1-012 and its associated Rules and Guideline, including this Rule 1-012B, the definitions
of prohibited Discrimination and other words and phrases are provided in Rule 1-012.
Prevention and Awareness. The University offers comprehensive programing intended to end Dating Violence, Domestic
Violence, Sexual Assault, and Stalking. The University provides education and training
designed to raise awareness of these issues and engages in efforts that aim to reduce
harm, improve communication skills, foster healthy relationships, improve bystander
intervention skills, and educate the campus community on the definitions of Consent,
Sexual Assault, Domestic Violence, Dating Violence, and Stalking through orientations
each semester given to incoming students. The University of Utah Department of Public
Safety (“UDPS”) offers sexual assault education and information programs to University
students and employees upon request. Literature on date rape education, risk reduction,
and University response, as well as educational programs about the same, are available
through various University Student Affairs offices including the Office of Housing
& Residential Education and through the University's Center for Student Wellness.
The University provides primary prevention and awareness programs for incoming students
and new employees, and ongoing programs for students, staff, and faculty which includes:
a statement that the University prohibits the offenses of Domestic Violence, Dating
the Utah statutory definitions of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault,
the Utah statutory definitions of consent, in reference to sexual activity;
safe and positive options for bystander intervention that may be carried out by an
individual to prevent harm or intervene when there is a risk of Domestic Violence,
information on risk reduction to recognize warning signs of abusive behavior, information
for those who may be at risk to perpetrate harm, and how to avoid potential attacks;
definitions of Sexual Misconduct under University Policy, as well as a copy of University
Policy 1-012, Rules 1-012, 1-012A, and 1-012B, and Guidline 1-012.
Initial Response. The first priority of any person who has been subject to Sexual Violence should be
to get to a safe place and then obtain necessary medical treatment and emotional support.
Victim-survivors may seek and receive a medical forensic examination free of charge
from a local hospital emergency department without submitting a police report. The
University strongly encourages victim-survivors to report all incidents of Sexual
Misconduct as soon as possible. Time is a critical factor for evidence collection
Role of Law Enforcement. The victim-survivor of an incident of Sexual Violence (rape,
fondling, incest, statutory rape), Dating Violence, Domestic Violence and Stalking
is encouraged, but not required, to report the incident directly to the University
Department of Public Safety (“UDPS”) or the local law enforcement entity for the jurisdiction
Alternatively, or in conjunction with a report to law enforcement, victim-survivors
may make a report to the Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)
(see Section (III)(C)), the Office of the Dean of Students, a Housing & Residential
Education representative, and/or another University representative. Filing a police
report will not obligate the victim-survivor to pursue a complaint through the criminal
ensure the victim-survivor receives appropriate medical treatment, including a medical
provides the opportunity for collection of evidence helpful in prosecution, which
cannot be obtained later (ideally, a victim-survivor of Sexual Violence should not
wash, use the toilet, or change clothing prior to a medical forensic exam); and
provide the victim-survivor with available resources, including supportive resources.
A victim-survivor may request any University representative to assist them in notifying
law enforcement authorities about an incident of Sexual Violence (rape, fondling,
incest, statutory rape) Dating Violence, Domestic Violence, Stalking and any other
When a victim-survivor contacts the UDPS, the UDPS will notify the Title IX Coordinator,
the OEO/AA, and the Office of the Dean of Students (if related to a student). A victim-
survivor may choose for an investigation to be pursued either through the criminal
justice system, through this rule, or both. Victim-survivors may also choose not to
proceed in the criminal justice system or under this rule (subject to Section (III)(D)
of this rule). A representative from the Center for Student Wellness Victim-Survivor
Advocacy program, Chief Safety Office Community Services Division, UDPS, the Office
of the Dean of Students, the Title IX Coordinator, and/or the OEO/AA will guide the
Where applicable, UDPS will enforce orders of protection, no contact orders, restraining
orders, civil stalking injunctions, or similar lawful orders issued by a criminal,
Role of the OEO/AA. The OEO/AA is the University department charged with responding to reports and investigating
Formal Complaints of Discrimination, including Sexual Misconduct.
The Director of the OEO/AA serves as the University’s Title IX Coordinator.
Sherrie Hayashi Director, Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action Title
IX/ADA/Section 504 Coordinator University of Utah 383 University Street, Level 1,
Suite OEO, Salt Lake City, UT 84112 Phone: (801) 581-8365 Fax: (801) 585-5746 oeo@utah.edu www.oeo.utah.edu
Upon receipt of a report of alleged Sexual Misconduct, Complainants will promptly
receive information from the Title IX Coordinator that:
provides the Complainant with written notification of and assist the Complainant in
accessing counseling, mental health and healthcare, victim advocacy, legal, academic
support, and other resources available in the community and on-campus;
offers and discusses Supportive Measures with or without the filing of a Formal Complaint;
considers the Complainant's wishes with respect to Supportive Measures;
explains the process for filing a Formal Complaint; and
informs the Complainant of the right to report a crime to campus or local law enforcement
and provide the Complainant with assistance, if requested.
Confidentiality.1 The University encourages victim-survivors of Sexual Misconduct to talk to someone
about what happened. Different employees on campus have different requirements to
Completely Confidential. Professional and pastoral counselors are completely confidential,
except any reporting required by state and federal law, and do not report any information
disclosed by a Complainant to the University or to the OEO/AA.
Limited Confidentiality. Nonprofessional counselors and advocates (e.g., individuals
who are not professional counselors and who work or volunteer, including front desk staff
and students, in the University Counseling Center, Center for Student Wellness, Center
for Student Wellness Victim-Survivor Advocacy program, Ombuds Office, or counseling
services in the Women’s Resource Center, must report only general information about
crimes required to be reported under the Clery Act to the Chief Safety Office — such
as the nature, date, time, and general location of the incident—in a way that does
Clery Reporting Requirements. Under the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) and the
Clery Act, the University is required to complete publicly available record- keeping
on crimes required to be reported by the Clery Act in accordance with federal law,
but will not disclose identifying information. The University will maintain as confidential
any Protective Measures provided to the victim-survivor, to the extent that maintaining
such confidentiality would not impair the ability of the institution to provide the
Confidential Resources. The following are resources are confidential. *These offices must report general information about crimes reportable under the
Clery Act to the Chief Safety Office in a way that does not identify the individuals involved, such as the nature, date, time, and general location of
the incident. This information is required to be included in the University’s Annual
Security Report under the Clery Act, and in rare circumstances may result in the issuance
of a timely warning or other University obligations under Clery/VAWA.
Student Services Building201 S 1640 E, Room 426Salt Lake City, UT 84112(801) 581-682624-hour Crisis Line: (801) 587-3000
University of Utah Hospital 50 N. Medical DriveSalt Lake City, UT 84132(801) 213-2484
Eccles Student Life Center1836 Student Life Way, Suite 2100Salt Lake City, UT 84112(801) 581-7776
Student Services Building201 S 1460 E, Room 330Salt Lake City, UT 84112 (801) 581-7779advocate@sa.utah.edu
Women’s Resource Center (counseling services only)*
A. Ray Olpin Union200 S. Central Campus Drive, Room 411 Salt Lake City, UT 84112(801) 581-8030
The Psychology and Wellness Program Student Athlete Support Services (SASS) Department
HPER East Pavilion, Room 113Salt Lake City, UT 84112
Health Science Office:Health Sciences Education Building Fifth Floor, Suite 551526 South 2000 EastSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-585-6283facultyombudsman@hsc.utah.edu
Campus Office:Office Locations:1738G Marriott Library3245 Eccles Institute of Human Genetics OfficePhone: 801.585.3482Fax: 801.581.4233ombudsman@utah.edu
A Mandatory Reporter must promptly report to the Title IX Coordinator all relevant
details about the alleged Sexual Misconduct shared by a Complainant—including the
names of the Complainant and alleged Respondent(s), any witnesses, and any other relevant
facts, including the date, time and specific location of the alleged incident.
Before a Complainant reveals any information to a Mandatory Reporter, the Mandatory
Reporter should ensure that the Complainant understands the Mandatory Reporter's reporting
obligations. If the Complainant wants to maintain confidentiality, the Mandatory Reporter
should direct the Complainant to confidential resources.
If the Complainant wants to tell the Mandatory Reporter what happened but also requests
confidentiality, requests that no investigation occur, or requests that no action
be taken against the Respondent, the Mandatory Reporter should tell the Complainant
that the University will consider the request, but cannot guarantee that the University
Requests for Confidentiality. If a Complainant discloses an incident to a Mandatory Reporter but wishes to maintain
confidentiality, or requests that no investigation into a particular incident be conducted
or disciplinary action taken, the University must weigh that request against the University’s
obligation to provide a safe, non-discriminatory environment for all students, including
The University has designated the Title IX Coordinator to evaluate requests for allegations
If the University determines that it cannot maintain a Complainant’s confidentiality,
the University will inform the Complainant prior to starting an investigation and
will, to the extent possible, only share information with people responsible for handling
Supportive Measures. When the University receives information about alleged Sexual Misconduct, an appropriate
University representative (such as the Dean of Students, cognizant supervisor, or
Human Resources (HR) representative) may offer Supportive Measures to either or both
parties which will generally remain in effect throughout and potentially beyond the
duration of the University investigation. Supportive Measures will be offered under
the auspices of the Title IX Coordinator; University representatives should consult
with the Title IX Coordinator in offering any Supportive Measures. The University
will offer Supportive Measures if they are reasonably available, regardless of whether
the Complainant chooses to file a complaint with the OEO/AA or with law enforcement.
Because the University is under a continuing obligation to address the issue of Sexual
Misconduct campus-wide, reports of Sexual Misconduct (including non-identifying reports)
will also prompt the University to consider broader remedial action.
Amnesty. An individual who makes a good faith report of Sexual Harassment or Sexual Misconduct
that was directed at them or another person will not be sanctioned for a violation
related to the use of drugs or alcohol that is related to the report.
Non-Disclosure of Information. Parties will be provided evidence obtained by the OEO/AA as part of the investigation
that is directly related to the allegations raised in the Formal Complaint (the "Evidence");
the parties and party advisors must keep all such evidence strictly confidential and
use such evidence solely for the purposes of participating in the Sexual Misconduct
investigation and grievance process. Parties who disseminate or use such evidence
for any other purpose may be subject to discipline.
OEO/AA Investigation. In cases of Sexual Misconduct, the OEO/AA will begin an investigation upon acceptance
of a Formal Complaint. The University will not require a Complainant to participate
in any investigation or disciplinary proceeding; however, failure to participate may
Upon acceptance of a Formal Complaint, the OEO/AA will provide written notice:
to the appropriate University administrator, which may include the supervisor, Chair,
Dean, and/or cognizant Vice President with responsibility over the Respondent and
If the Respondent is a student, the Vice President for Student Affairs and the Office
If the Respondent is a Vice President, another Vice President will be selected as
the cognizant Vice President for purposes of this rule.
the applicable policies and associated rules by which the proceedings will be governed;
sufficient details of the allegations including the identities of the parties involved,
the date and location of the alleged incident(s), and the conduct allegedly constituting
a statement that each party will have an equal opportunity to submit and review evidence
a statement that the Respondent is presumed not responsible for the alleged conduct
until a determination is made at the conclusion of the grievance process;
a statement informing the Complainant and Respondent that they may have one advisor
of their choice, who may be, but is not required to be an attorney and one Support
that Rule 1-012(III)(D)(10) prohibits knowingly making false statements or knowingly
submitting false statements during the grievance process.
If, during the course of the investigation, allegations arise about the Complainant
or Respondent that were not included in the initial notice, the OEO/AA will provide
notice of the additional allegations and provide the Respondent with an opportunity
The Respondent shall be afforded a full opportunity to respond to the allegations
contained in the Complaint. Failure to respond or participate in an interview by the
Respondent or a witness will not prevent the completion of the investigation.
The OEO/AA will not draw an inference about the determination of responsibility based
solely on a party’s or witness’s decision not to participate in the investigative
or hearing process; however, evidence for review will be limited to that provided
by parties and witnesses who participate in the investigation.
The OEO/AA shall interview the Complainant, the Respondent, and may interview any
other person with relevant information. The OEO/AA will objectively review all relevant
information, including that which is submitted by the parties.
The Complainant and the Respondent may each be accompanied at any meetings or interviews
with the OEO/AA by one advisor who may be, but does not have to be, an attorney. During
the investigation, the advisor may only advise the Complainant or Respondent and may
not actively participate. Prior to the hearing, any advisor is at the Complainant
The Complainant and the Respondent may each be accompanied at any meetings or interviews
by one Support Person. The Support Person's role is to provide support to the Complainant
or Respondent and cannot speak on behalf of the party.
At the conclusion of the investigation, the OEO/AA shall issue the draft of its investigative
report (“OEO Draft”) simultaneously to the parties and their advisors, if any, in
an electronic or hard copy format. The OEO Draft shall include:
an analysis of whether the evidence, evaluated under a Preponderance of the Evidence
standard, supports a recommendation that Sexual Misconduct occurred;
any evidence obtained as part of the investigation that is directly related to the
To protect the privacy of witnesses and all parties involved, and pursuant to Family
Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) and other state and federal privacy laws,
names and other personally identifiable information may be redacted from the copies
of the OEO Draft Report and the OEO Report that are provided to the Complainant and
Both parties shall have ten (10) calendar days after receipt of the OEO Draft Report
to submit written comments and any additional documents and/or evidence to the OEO/AA.
If information from either party raises new issues or allegations, the OEO/AA may
At the conclusion of the OEO/AA’s investigation, the OEO/AA shall issue a final investigative
report (“OEO Report”) simultaneously to the parties and their advisors, if any, and
the appropriate administrator with responsibility over the Respondent in an electronic
an analysis of whether the evidence, evaluated under a Preponderance of the Evidence
standard, supports a recommendation that Sexual Misconduct occurred;
any evidence obtained as part of the investigation that is directly related to the
Upon determining a recommended sanction, the appropriate administrator will provide
written notice of a recommended sanction to the parties, to the OEO/AA, and the Hearing
Coordinator, and to the cognizant Vice President with responsibility over the Respondent
and any others with a legitimate business need, contemporaneous with the OEO/AA issuing
At the conclusion of the investigation, the OEO/AA shall convene a Hearing Committee
(“Committee”). This Committee shall serve as the decision-maker with regard to the
allegations of Sexual Misconduct, any associated disciplinary sanction or other corrective
measures, and any remedies for the Complainant. The Committee shall make an independent
judgment in objectively evaluating relevant evidence to reach a determination regarding
responsibility, independent from the recommendation from the investigator or the appropriate
Hearings should take place as soon as practicable, but should be no less than fifteen
(15) and no more than forty (40) calendar days from the issuance of the OEO Report.
Although the OEO/AA Hearing Coordinator may endeavor to find a hearing date that will
be convenient for all the parties involved, the Hearing Coordinator and Committee
Chair have the final authority for determining the date of the hearing.
A Hearing Coordinator may facilitate the work of the Committee. Hearing Coordinator
notify the Complainant, the Respondent, the Committee, and the OEO/AA of the date
notify the Complainant and the Respondent of the names of the Committee members and
any witnesses requested by the Complainant, the Respondent, or the Committee;
notify persons requested by the Committee, Complainant, and/or Respondent to testify
at the hearing of the time and place of the hearing.
distribute the Hearing Procedure and any documentary evidence to the Complainant and
arrange for an electronic recording of the hearing; and
provide other reasonable support services at the Committee’s request.
provide the Committee with a copy OEO Report, the attachments (including a copy of
the complaint), and a list of the material witnesses identified in the OEO Report;
provide other reasonable investigatory and support services at the Committee’s request.
Appropriate Sanctioning Administrator responsibilities include:
provide the Committee with a recommended sanction, disciplinary action, or other corrective
Closed Hearing. Hearings shall be closed to the public.
Advisor. The Complainant and the Respondent may each be accompanied at the hearing
by one advisor of their choice, who may be an attorney and who may participate in
the hearing as provided in this Hearing Process. If a party does not have an advisor
present at the hearing, the University will provide, without fee or charge to that
party, an advisor of the University's choice to conduct cross-examination on behalf
Support Person. The Complainant and Respondent may each be accompanied at the hearing
by one Support Person of their choice, who may attend but not participate in the hearing.
Witnesses. The Committee, the Complainant, and the Respondent may request the appearance
of witnesses at the hearing. It is the responsibility of the party or the Committee
calling a particular witness to encourage that witness to attend the hearing.
Documentary Evidence. The Complainant and the Respondent may submit documentary evidence
for consideration by the Committee. The Committee may also request additional documentary
Rules of Evidence. The Committee shall not be bound by strict rules of legal evidence
or procedure and may consider any evidence it deems relevant.
Privacy. Committee Chairs and other Committee members are prohibited from discussing
any matter related to the hearing with the parties or the witnesses, or with others
before or after the hearing. Violation of privacy may result in dismissal from the
Electronic Hearings. Hearings shall be conducted remotely through electronic means,
instead of in- person, when at all possible. These remote hearings shall include audio
and video capabilities which will allow for parties to simultaneously see, hear, and
interact with the Committee, witnesses, and each- other in real-time as if physically
Recording of Hearings. The hearing, except for deliberations, shall be recorded and
a copy in electronic format shall be made available to either party upon request at
Failure of Party to Participate. In the event either party fails to attend the hearing
without prior notice to the Hearing Coordinator and good cause, the Committee may
proceed with the hearing. Neither party is required to participate in the hearing
in order for the hearing to proceed, subject to restrictions in Section (III)(I)(4).
Disruptive Behavior. The Committee has authority to exclude from the hearing any party,
advisor, or other participant whose behavior the Committee finds disruptive after
Time Allocation. Each party shall have up to forty- five (45) minutes for personal
and/or opening statements, presentation of evidence and questioning of witnesses,
and concluding remarks. The Committee Chair shall have discretion to grant extensions
Role of Office of General Counsel. The Office of General Counsel may provide a staff
attorney to be present at hearings in order to provide guidance to the Committee on
Sanctions and Remedies. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Committee shall determine
the appropriate sanctions and remedies. The Committee will ensure that any sanctions
and remedies are appropriate to end the prohibited conduct, to prevent further violation
The Committee will review the recommendation submitted by the appropriate administrator
and may call that individual as a witness during the hearing to speak to the reasoning
supporting the recommendation when making their decision. In determining the appropriate
sanction, the Committee shall consider the severity, persistence or pervasiveness
of the misconduct; the egregiousness of the misconduct, including the use of weapons,
drugs, or alcohol, if applicable; the impact of the misconduct on the Complainant;
the impact or implications of the misconduct on the University community, prior misconduct
by the Respondent, including the Respondent's relevant prior disciplinary history;
whether the Respondent has accepted responsibility for the misconduct; the maintenance
of a safe, nondiscriminatory and respectful working and learning environment; and
any other mitigating, aggravating or compelling factors.
If the Respondent is a student, the Office of the Dean of Students will recommend
to the Hearing Committee the disciplinary sanction or other corrective measures. Sanctions
or other corrective measures in cases of Sexual Misconduct are not subject to Policy
6- 400, Code of Student Rights and Responsibilities (“Student Code”) and may only be appealed under Policy 1- 012 and its associated regulations including
this Rule. Possible sanctions include, but are not limited to: fines, restitution,
warning, withholding diploma, organizational sanction, permanent no-contact directives,
educational training, referrals to counseling or behavioral coaching, limitations,
restrictions, or exclusion from campus or campus programs or activities, notation
on the student's transcript consistent with the Family Educational Rights and Privacy
Act, suspension from one semester to five years, dismissal from the University, or
If the Respondent is a staff member, the appropriate University administrator with
supervisory responsibility over the Respondent, in consultation with Human Resources,
will recommend to the Hearing Committee a disciplinary sanction or other corrective
measures. Sanctions or other corrective measures in cases of Sexual Misconduct are
not subject to Policy 5-203, Staff Employee Grievance Procedures, and may only be reviewed and/or appealed under Policy 1-012 and its associated regulations
including this Rule. Possible sanctions include, but are not limited, to: verbal counseling
or warning, extension of probationary period, reassignment, transfer, limitations,
restrictions, or exclusion from campus or campus programs or activities, reduction
in pay, written warning, final written warning, suspension without pay, demotion,
If the Respondent is a faculty member, the appropriate University administrator, such
as the faculty member’s Department Chair or Dean, in consultation with the cognizant
Vice President, will recommend to the Hearing Committee the disciplinary sanction
or other corrective action. Possible sanctions include, but are not limited, to: verbal
counseling or warning, limitations, restrictions, or exclusion from campus or campus
programs or activities, written reprimand, suspension without pay and dismissal (termination).
If the Respondent is a vendor/contractor/visitor/patient, possible sanctions or other
corrective measures include limitations, restrictions, or exclusion from all or part(s)
of campus or campus programs or activities and/or ending business relationships with
Remedies. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Committee shall make a determination
regarding any appropriate remedies for the Complainant, including but not limited
to: reinstatement, transfer or reassignment of employees, Supportive Measures, implementing
changes in programs and activities, providing training, or other remedies designed
to restore equal access to University Programs or Activities. The Title IX Coordinator
is responsible for effective implementation of any remedies.
The OEO/AA shall create a standing pool of committee members to hear and be the decision-
makers determining whether allegations of Sexual Misconduct violate University Policy.
The Hearing Committee will be the decision-maker with regard to a finding of responsibility
related to allegations of Sexual Misconduct and any resulting disciplinary sanction
or corrective measures. The pool of eligible Committee members includes the following:
staff employees of the University nominated by the Chief Human Resources Officer and/or
Staff Council and appointed by the University President and/or designee, and who will
students (graduate and/or undergraduate) nominated pursuant to procedures of Associated
Students of the University of Utah (ASUU) and/or the Office of the Dean of Students,
and appointed by the University President or designee, who will serve a one- year
faculty members from the Consolidated Hearing Committee pool.
The Committee shall be composed of a three-person panel selected from the pool of
The panel will consist of the Committee Chair, and one Committee member of the same
status as the Complainant (student, staff, or faculty), and one Committee member of
the same status as the Respondent (student, staff, or faculty), subject to the following
exceptions. In the interest of prompt resolution, a Committee may be convened without
student representation during school breaks or other time periods that present student
scheduling difficulties. No more than one student will serve on a Committee.
The Committee Chair will be selected from the pool of eligible committee members who
have previously served on a Committee and will receive specific training relevant
A Committee member may be disqualified due to bias, conflict of interest, or for other
good cause. Alternates will be appointed as needed.
In order to provide an objective and fair hearing, each Committee shall take precautions
against real or apparent conflicts of interest on the part of Committee members. Committee
members shall recuse themselves in any case in which they have a personal bias or
conflict of interest that would preclude their making a fair and objective decision
and shall avoid any individual communication with a party.
If there is a challenge to the participation of any Committee member, the remaining
Committee members shall hear that dispute and make a final decision about the participation
At least fifteen (15) calendar days before the hearing, the Hearing Coordinator shall
notify the Complainant and Respondent in writing, in either an electronic or hard
the date, time, location, participants, and purpose of the hearing;
the names of all witnesses that the Committee intends to call;
any additional documentary evidence that was not included in the OEO Report that the
of the applicable policies and associated rules and guidelines by which the proceedings
At least ten (10) calendar days before the hearing, the Complainant and the Respondent
of any request that a Committee member be disqualified based on bias or conflict of
the name and contact information of their selected advisor, if any;
the name and contact information of their selected Support Person, if any;
a list of any witnesses they wish to speak on their behalf as well as contact information
any additional documentary evidence to be submitted to the Committee, including
information the Committee has requested from the parties; and
any other requests for accommodations, including technological accommodations. The
request will be reviewed by Committee Chair and at the Chair's request, the Hearing
Coordinator will make any appropriate accommodations.
At least five (5) calendar days before the hearing, the Hearing Coordinator shall
notify the Complainant and Respondent in writing, in electronic or hard copy format:
provide copies of all evidence that has not already been provided; and
of any accommodations, including technological accommodations that will be made at
The OEO Consultant who conducted the investigation may be present at the hearing and
The Complainant and the Respondent shall each have an opportunity to make a personal
statement. The statement may describe the events that are the subject of the Complaint,
the personal impact of the alleged conduct, the relief sought, and any other relevant
information. In addition to the personal statements by the parties, each party’s advisor
shall have the opportunity to make an opening statement.
The Committee, Complainant, and the Respondent shall have the opportunity to call
The Committee may ask questions of the OEO Consultant, the Complainant, the Respondent,
and any witness. The time of Committee questions and answers shall not count against
Prior to any party or witness answering a question, the Committee Chair must first
determine whether such question is relevant and explain any decision to exclude a
question as not relevant. Only the person to whom a question is directed may answer
(i.e., an advisor shall not be permitted to answer the Committee’s questions on a
Questions and evidence about the Complainant’s sexual predispositions or prior sexual
behavior are not relevant, unless such questions and evidence are offered to prove
that someone other than the Respondent committed the conduct alleged by the Complainant;
if the questions and evidence concern specific incidents of the Complainant’s prior
sexual behavior with respect to the Respondent and are offered to prove Consent.
The Committee must permit each party's advisor to ask the OEO Consultant, the Complainant,
the Respondent, any witnesses, and any others providing testimony, all relevant questions
and follow-up questions, including questions challenging credibility. The cross-examination
of any person providing testimony (including the parties, witnesses, and the OEO Consultant)
shall be conducted directly, orally and in real time by the party’s advisor and not
by the party themselves and must be directed through the Committee Chair (not directly).
The Committee cannot draw an inference about the determination regarding responsibility
based solely on a party's or witnesses absence from the hearing or refusal to answer
The parties may also present other evidence. If a party presents documentary evidence
at the hearing that was not previously provided to the other party and or the Committee
prior to the hearing, the Committee Chair shall make a determination as to whether
Following the presentation of evidence, the Committee will then ask the appropriate
administrator (in cases where the Respondent is a student, a representative from the
Office of the Dean of Students; in cases where the Respondent is a staff employee,
a representative from the Human Resources department and/or the Respondent’s manager;
and, in cases where the Respondent is a faculty member, a representative from the
Office for Faculty and/or the Respondent’s Chair/Dean) to speak to the recommended
The Committee will conclude the hearing by providing an opportunity for the parties
to make concluding remarks. The Chair will then adjourn the hearing and begin Committee
Committee deliberations and voting shall be closed sessions from which all other persons
are excluded, except, at the Committee’s request, an advising attorney from the Office
of General Counsel. The advising attorney may remain present for deliberations but
shall have no vote. The Committee in its discretion may take votes openly or by secret
written ballot. A majority vote by the members of the Committee who attended the hearing
shall be required for decisions. The Committee Chair shall be entitled to vote on
all questions. The OEO/AA, including the Director, shall not participate in the Committee’s
When the Complainant is a patient, Section J above shall not apply and will be addressed
by the procedure outlined at http://healthcare.utah.edu/policies/discrimination.php.
In lieu of a live hearing, the parties may submit a written personal statement, and
submit relevant written questions they wish to be asked of the other party and/or
witnesses no later than three (3) calendar days prior to the designated date. The
Committee will ask those questions (along with any questions the Committee may have
for the parties and/or witnesses) in writing to the other party and/or witnesses and
shall provide each party with the answers and allow for limited follow-up questions
The Committee shall then meet on a designated date, no later than five (5) days following
the conclusion of the written question and answer period, to consider the evidence
Within ten (10) calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing, the Committee shall
provide its written determination (“Committee Report”) simultaneously to the parties,
their advisors, if any, and the OEO/AA. The Committee Report shall include:
identification of the allegations potentially constituting Sexual Misconduct;
a description of the procedural steps taken from the receipt of the Formal Complaint
conclusions regarding application of the relevant policies to the facts;
a statement of, and rationale for, the result as to each allegation including a determination
regarding responsibility and any disciplinary sanctions the Committee imposes on the
Respondent and whether remedies designed to restore or preserve equal access to the
University’s Program or Activity will be provided to the Complainant; and
the procedures and permissible bases for the parties to appeal.
The appealing party (whether student, staff, or faculty) must articulate the applicable
bases for their appeal, which must include at least one of the following:
a procedural irregularity that affected the outcome of the matter;
new evidence that was not reasonably available at the time the determination was made,
the Title IX Coordinator, investigator(s), or decision- maker(s) had a conflict of
interest or bias for or against complainants or Respondents generally or the individual
Complainant or Respondent that affected the outcome of the matter; and
the findings regarding responsibility and or the disciplinary sanction or corrective
The Hearing Coordinator must notify the other party in writing that an appeal has
Appeal procedures must be applied equally to both parties.
Each party may provide a written statement in support of, or challenging, the decision
within five (5) days of the notice that an appeal has been filed.
In cases where the either party is not a faculty member, the Complainant and the Respondent
may each appeal the decision of the Hearing Committee to the cognizant Vice President
or their designee by submitting a request in writing to the Hearing Coordinator within
five (5) calendar days of notice of the Hearing Committee’s decision. Failure to file
a timely written request for appeal shall constitute a waiver of the right to an appeal
under this section. If there is no timely written request for an appeal, the Hearing
Committee’s decision shall become the final and binding decision of the University
The Vice President or their designee shall have available for review all relevant
documentation, including the Committee Report, any other materials presented to the
Committee, the statements or the parties supporting or opposing the appeal, and if
requested by the Vice President or their designee, a recording of the proceedings.
The Vice President or their designee may not base a decision on information not presented
at the hearing unless the nature of that information is fairly communicated to the
parties and a reasonable opportunity to respond is given. The Vice President or their
designee may seek advice from neutral advisors; and
The Vice President or their designee will issue a final and binding decision (“Final
Result”) in writing within ten (10) calendar days of the written request for appeal.
The written decision will describe the result of the appeal and the rationale for
the result. For good cause, the Vice President or their designee may extend the ten-day
period. The Vice President or designee shall simultaneously notify the parties, their
advisors, if any, and the supervisor, Dean, Chair, and any other cognizant University
In cases where either party is a faculty member, the Complainant and the Respondent
may each appeal the decision of the Hearing Committee to the President or their designee
instead of the Vice President, by submitting a request in writing to the Hearing Coordinator
within five (5) calendar days of notice of the Hearing Committee’s decision. Failure
to file a timely written request for appeal shall constitute a waiver of the right
to an appeal under this section. If there is no timely written request for an appeal,
the Hearing Committee’s decision shall become the final and binding decision of the
On appeal, the President or their designee shall have available for review all relevant
documentation, including the Committee Report, any other materials presented to the
Committee, and if requested by the President, an audio recording of the proceedings.
The President may not base a decision on information not presented at the hearing
unless the nature of that information is fairly communicated to the parties and a
reasonable opportunity to respond is given. The President may seek advice from neutral
The President or their designee will issue a final and binding decision (“Final Result”)
in writing within ten (10) calendar days of the written request for appeal. For good
cause, the President or their designee may extend the ten-day period. The Hearing
Coordinator shall concurrently notify the Complainant, the Respondent, and the supervisor,
Dean, Chair, and any other cognizant University representatives of the Final Result.
Training. All materials used to train Title IX Coordinators, investigators, Hearing Committee
members and other decision- makers, including any person who facilitates an Informal
Resolution process related to Sexual Harassment and the grievance process shall be
made publicly available on the OEO/AA website at oeo.utah.edu. Training materials
must not rely on sex/gender stereotypes and must promote impartial investigations
and adjudications of Formal Complaints of Sexual Harassment.
Title IX Coordinators, investigators, decision-makers and any person who facilitates
an Informal Resolution process will receive training on the definition of Sexual Harassment,
the scope of the University's Programs or Activities, how to conduct an investigation
and grievance process including hearings, appeals, Informal Resolution processes,
and how to serve impartially, including by avoiding prejudgment of the facts at issue,
Decision-makers will be trained on how to determine issues of relevance of questions
and evidence, including when questions and evidence about the complainant's sexual
predisposition or prior sexual behavior are not relevant, on evidentiary standards
Investigators will be trained on issues of relevance to create an investigative report
The Title IX Coordinator, hearing officers and other necessary parties will be trained
[Note: Parts IV-VII of this Regulation (and all other University Regulations) are Regulations
Resource Information – the contents of which are not approved by the Academic Senate
or Board of Trustees, and are to be updated from time to time as determined appropriate
by the cognizant Policy Officer and the Institutional Policy Committee, as per Policy
34 C.F.R. § 668.46 Institutional Security Policies and Crime Statistics
Utah Code Ann. § 76-5-106.5 Stalking—Definitions—Injunction—Penalties
Utah Code Ann. § 76-5-406 Sexual offense against the victim without consent of victim—Circumstances
Utah Code Ann. § 76-9-702.7 Voyeurism offenses—Penalties
Utah Board of Higher Education (formerly Board of Regents) Policy No. R256: Student Disciplinary Processes
Utah Board of Higher Education (formerly Board of Regents) Policy No. R831: Minimum Requirements for Non-Faculty Staff Employment
Utah Board of Higher Education (formerly Board of Regents) Policy No. R841: Minimum Requirements for Disciplinary Sanctions
Policy 1-004: Violence in the Workplace and Academic Environment
Rule 1-012B: Sexual Misconduct Complaint Process Rule
Policy 5-106: Equal Opportunity and Nondiscrimination Employment
Policy 1-020: Required Professional Boundaries in Relationships
Policy 5-117: Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy
Policy 6-011: Senate Consolidated Hearing Committee
Policy 6-316: Code of Faculty Rights and Responsibilities
Policy 6-400: Code of Student Rights and Responsibilities
The designated contact officials for this Policy are:
Policy Owner (primary contact person for questions and advice): Office of Equal Opportunity
These officials are designated by the University President or delegee, with assistance
of the Institutional Policy Committee, to have the following roles and authority,
"A "Policy Officer" will be assigned by the President for each University Policy,
and will typically be someone at the executive level of the University (i.e., the
President and Cabinet Officers). The assigned Policy Officer is authorized to allow
"The Policy Officer will identify an "Owner" for each Policy. The Policy Owner is
an expert on the Policy topic who may respond to questions about, and provide interpretation
of the Policy; and will typically be someone reporting to an executive level position
(as defined above), but may be any other person to whom the President or a Vice President
has delegated such authority for a specified area of University operations. The Owner
has primary responsibility for maintaining the relevant portions of the Regulations
Library. [and] bears the responsibility for determining which reference materials
are helpful in understanding the meaning and requirements of particular Policies..." University Rule 1- 001-III-B & E
Editorial revisions to current version: Updated March 17, 2022 to update OEO's address.
This Interim Rule Revision 1 was put into effect on August 20, 2020, by University
President Ruth Watkins, after consultation with the Academic Senate Executive Committee
July 13, 2020, and presentation to and approval of the Executive Committee of the
Board of Trustees August 17, 2020. It was subsequently presented for the Information
and Recommendations of the Academic Senate, August 31, 2020. It was enacted as an
Interim revision (in accord with Policy 1-001) in order to comply with recently changed
federal regulations. A permanent version is anticipated to be adopted by August 14,
2022 after review by appropriate internal University groups.
Revision 0. Approved by the Academic Senate: January 9, 2017.
Approved by the Board of Trustees: February 14, 2017, with the designated effective
201 Presidents Circle Rm 309Salt Lake City, UT 84112801-587-2357
The University of Utah has created this statement to demonstrate our firm commitment
to your privacy. This document explains how we gather, use, and protect your information.
While using this site, you may choose to submit personal information through email
or online forms. We will use this information to process your requests. But we will
not intentionally sell, share, or distribute your personal information to third parties,
Please be aware of the University’s GDPR Privacy Notice that supplements this Privacy
Statement. The GDPR Privacy Notice applies generally to the provision of personal
information by individuals in the European Economic Area. The GDPR Privacy Notice
explains how we meet our obligations under the European Union General Data Protection
Regulation with respect to such information. The GDPR Privacy Notice can be found
The University uses reporting programs to collect data about visitor traffic to our
site. We do not attempt to personally identify visitors. Instead we collect data to
analyze in aggregate to determine trends and improve our sites. Here are some examples
Some U sites require the use of cookies (bits of data passed by your browser to our
site). For instance, the My.Utah.edu portal uses cookies (active only during your
session) to remember password and menu settings. You are not required to use My.Utah.edu;
this tool is provided for your convenience. If you prefer not to receive cookies,
you can turn them off in your browser or set your browser to ask you before accepting
We have put in place appropriate physical, electronic, and managerial procedures to
safeguard and help prevent unauthorized access, to assist in maintaining data security,
and to assist in correctly using the information we collect online. We do not intentionally
release personal information gleaned from these programs to others, except as required
Although we make every effort to secure our networks, the University cannot guarantee
privacy of online communications. Use discretion in providing information in online
classes, chatrooms, or other open forums on the Web. If you use My.Utah.edu to access
personal records, be sure to "lock up" when you leave by exiting the site AND closing
your browser. Otherwise, the next person to use the computer may see your information.
You have a choice about whether to provide personal information online. For other
options, contact the site manager and learn how you can provide information by phone,
This site contains links to other independently managed U sites. Some may use information
for purposes other than stated above; be sure to read their separate privacy statements.
U sites also contain links to sites outside the university; these sites may have their
own privacy statement--or none at all. We urge you to exercise caution when providing
personal data to any site. Check their policies and contact them if you have questions.
We encourage parents to explore our website with their children. If we learn that
a child under age 13 has provided personally identifiable information to our sites,
we will promptly remove this from our files. For more on children's privacy rights,
read about the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act at the FTC's website.
Here's how to review or change your personal profile information (address, home phone,
On the Web – Log in to the Campus Information Services and click your address, phone, or email to edit.
In Person – Visit Registration Service Window #13 on the 2nd floor of the Student Services Building.
By Phone – Call the Registration Division (801) 581-8969.
Policies & Procedures 1-12 U Institutional Data Management Policy
Policies & Procedures 1-15 U Information Resources Policy
Policies & Procedures 1-16 U World Wide Web Resources Policy
The University, and those who work, teach, and learn here, value the privacy of the
health information you provide us. The Information Security and Privacy Office website explains how we handle the personal information that you share with us as
a patient, health/benefits plan member, or participant in a research study. The website
also provides information explaining the rights you have regarding that information
and how to exercise those rights. We provide the notices to make you aware of these
practices and to comply with the law, including the Health Insurance Portability and
University policies are subject to change. We encourage you to check back for updates
from time to time. If you have additional questions about this privacy statement,
University Webmaster 101 South Wasatch Drive #215 Salt Lake City, UT 84112 (801) 585-7320webmaster@utah.edu
201 Presidents Circle Salt Lake City, UT 84112 801.581.7200
Nondiscrimination Statement - The University of Utah
The University of Utah does not discriminate on the basis of race, ethnicity, color,
religion, national origin, sex, pregnancy, pregnancy-related conditions, age, disability,
sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, genetic information or protected
veteran’s status, in employment, treatment, admission, access to educational programs
and activities, or other University benefits or services.
The University does not discriminate on the basis of sex in the education program
or activity that it operates, as required by Title IX and 34 CFR part 106.  The requirement
not to discriminate in education programs or activities extends to admission and employment.
Inquiries about the application of Title IX and its regulations may be referred to
the Title IX Coordinator, to the Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights,
Additionally, the University endeavors to provide reasonable accommodations and to
ensure equal access to qualified persons with disabilities. Click here to request a reasonable accommodation.
Where discrimination is found to have occurred, the University will take reasonable
steps to investigate the matter, stop the harassment, prevent its recurrence and remedy
If you or someone you know has experienced discrimination, sexual misconduct including
sexual harassment, or disability discrimination, we encourage you to report it to
the University's designated and authorized Title IX/ADA/Section 504 Coordinator in
the Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action:
Sherrie Hayashi, DirectorTitle IX/ADA/Section 504 CoordinatorOffice of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)201 South Presidents Circle, Rm.135 Salt Lake City, UT, 84112801-581-8365 801-585-5746 (fax)oeo@utah.eduwww.oeo.utah.eduOnline reports may be submitted at oeo.utah.edu
To file a formal complaint of discrimination, sexual misconduct (including sexual
harassment or violence), or retaliation, under University of Utah Non-Discrimination
Policy, contact the OEO/AA.   A formal complaint may be filed with the OEO/AA in person,
A Formal Complaint of Sex or Gender-Based Harassment within the scope of Title IX
is timely if at the time of filing a Formal Complaint, the Complainant is participating
in or attempting to participate in a University Program.
A Formal Complaint alleging any other type of Sexual Misconduct, or other type of
Discrimination is timely if filed within 180 calendar days of the last alleged discriminatory
A Formal Complaint of Retaliation is timey filed if filed within 180 days of the last
A Formal Complaint not filed within the appropriate time period above will be dismissed
as untimely filed; however, at the Director's discretion and for good cause, the complaint
may be accepted as if filed within the appropriate time period.
University of UtahOffice of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)201 S. Presidents Circle, Room 135Salt Lake City, UT  84112Telephone: 801-581-8365Fax: 801-585-5746oeo@utah.eduwww.oeo.utah.eduOnline reports may be submitted at oeo.utah.edu
For specific information related to University Policy, please see:
regulations.utah.edu/general/1-012.phpregulations.utah.edu/general/1-011.php
EXTERNAL AGENCIES:  Filing a complaint with the University of Utah’s Title IX/504/ADA Coordinator (or
designee) does not prevent an individual from filing a complaint with an appropriate
regulatory agency. To file a complaint regarding discrimination, including sexual
harassment, or retaliation with a regulatory state or federal agency, please see the
agency information below.  For information about the time frames in which complaints
Education: Complaints regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title IX of the Education
Amendments of 1972, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Title II of the
Americans with Disabilities Act, Age Discrimination Act of 1975.
United States Department of EducationOffice for Civil Rights– Region VIIICesar E. Chavez Memorial Building1244 Speer Boulevard, Suite 310Denver, Colorado 80204-3582Telephone: 303-844-5695FAX: 303-844-4303
Online complaint portal: http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/docs/howto.htmlwww2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/index.html
Employment:State Agency:  Individual complaints regarding: Utah Anti-Discrimination Act of 1965,
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, Age Discrimination in Employment
Act of 1967, as amended, and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. Utah Anti-Discrimination and Labor Division (UALD)160 East 300 South, 3rd floorP.O. Box 146630Salt Lake City, Utah 84114-6630Telephone: 801-530-6801www.laborcommission.utah.gov
Federal Agencies:Complaints regarding: Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, The Pregnancy Discrimination
Act, Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, as amended (ADEA), Equal Pay Act
of 1963, Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act of 2008, Sections
501 and 505 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and Section 102 and 103 of the Civil
Rights Act of 1991, the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 (GINA) Equal Employment Opportunity CommissionPhoenix District Office3300 North Central Avenue, Suite 690Phoenix, AZ 85012Telephone: 1-800-669-4000TTY:  1-800-669-6820Fax: 602-640-5071www.eeoc.gov U.S. Department of LaborOffice of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP)Denver District Office1244 Speer Blvd, Suite 540Denver, CO 80204Phone 720-264-3200Fax:  720-264-3211https://www.dol.gov/ofccp/index.htm Executive Order 11246 (Equal Employment and Affirmative Action)Americans with Disability Act Amendments Act, of 2008Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 197338 USC 4212 – The Vietnam Era Veterans’ Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974Uniformed Service Employment and Re-employment Rights Act (USERRA)Online complaint portal:www.dol.gov/elaws/vets/userra/ee_disc.asp Veteran’s Employment and Training Service140 East 300 South, Room 209Salt Lake City, UT 84111Telephone: 801-526-0950jobs.utah.gov/jobseeker/veterans/employtrain.html
Housing (Residents of dorms and family student housing)State Agency:  Complaints regarding: Utah Fair Housing Act of 1993, as amended.
Utah Anti-Discrimination and Labor Division (UALD)160 East 300 South, 3rd floorSalt Lake City, Utah 84114-6630Telephone: 801-530-6801www.laborcommission.utah.gov Federal Agency:  U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”) Complaints
regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, Title VIII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1968 (Fair Housing Act), Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Action
of 1973, as amended, Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, Age
Discrimination Act of 1975, Title IX of the Education Amendments Act, and Architectural
Barriers Act of 1968. U.S. Department of Housing & Urban Development (HUD)1670 Broadway, 25th floorDenver, Colorado 80202-4801Telephone: (303)672-5440Fax: (303)672-5004Online complaint portal: https://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/topics/housing_discrimination Health care, human services, and health insurance plans (Patients and Participants):  Complaints regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, Title
II of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and the Community Service Assurance
provisions of the Hill-Burton Act U.S. Department of Health & Human ServicesOffice for Civil Rights, DHHS – Region VIII1961 Stout Street Room 08-148Denver, CO 80294Customer Response Center 1-800-368-1019TDD:  1-800-537-7697Email: Ocrmail@hhs.govOnline complaint portal: https://ocrportal.hhs.gov/ocr/smartscreen/main.jsfWebsite: www.hhs.gov/ocrCampus Accessibility Website: https://accessibility.utah.edu
201 Presidents Circle Salt Lake City, UT 84112 801.581.7200
The University of Utah has created this statement to demonstrate our firm commitment
to your privacy. This document explains how we gather, use, and protect your information.
While using this site, you may choose to submit personal information through email
or online forms. We will use this information to process your requests. But we will
not intentionally sell, share, or distribute your personal information to third parties,
Please be aware of the University’s GDPR Privacy Notice that supplements this Privacy
Statement. The GDPR Privacy Notice applies generally to the provision of personal
information by individuals in the European Economic Area. The GDPR Privacy Notice
explains how we meet our obligations under the European Union General Data Protection
Regulation with respect to such information. The GDPR Privacy Notice can be found
The University uses reporting programs to collect data about visitor traffic to our
site. We do not attempt to personally identify visitors. Instead we collect data to
analyze in aggregate to determine trends and improve our sites. Here are some examples
Some U sites require the use of cookies (bits of data passed by your browser to our
site). For instance, the My.Utah.edu portal uses cookies (active only during your
session) to remember password and menu settings. You are not required to use My.Utah.edu;
this tool is provided for your convenience. If you prefer not to receive cookies,
you can turn them off in your browser or set your browser to ask you before accepting
We have put in place appropriate physical, electronic, and managerial procedures to
safeguard and help prevent unauthorized access, to assist in maintaining data security,
and to assist in correctly using the information we collect online. We do not intentionally
release personal information gleaned from these programs to others, except as required
Although we make every effort to secure our networks, the University cannot guarantee
privacy of online communications. Use discretion in providing information in online
classes, chatrooms, or other open forums on the Web. If you use My.Utah.edu to access
personal records, be sure to "lock up" when you leave by exiting the site AND closing
your browser. Otherwise, the next person to use the computer may see your information.
You have a choice about whether to provide personal information online. For other
options, contact the site manager and learn how you can provide information by phone,
This site contains links to other independently managed U sites. Some may use information
for purposes other than stated above; be sure to read their separate privacy statements.
U sites also contain links to sites outside the university; these sites may have their
own privacy statement--or none at all. We urge you to exercise caution when providing
personal data to any site. Check their policies and contact them if you have questions.
We encourage parents to explore our website with their children. If we learn that
a child under age 13 has provided personally identifiable information to our sites,
we will promptly remove this from our files. For more on children's privacy rights,
read about the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act at the FTC's website.
Here's how to review or change your personal profile information (address, home phone,
On the Web – Log in to the Campus Information Services and click your address, phone, or email to edit.
In Person – Visit Registration Service Window #13 on the 2nd floor of the Student Services Building.
By Phone – Call the Registration Division (801) 581-8969.
Policies & Procedures 1-12 U Institutional Data Management Policy
Policies & Procedures 1-15 U Information Resources Policy
Policies & Procedures 1-16 U World Wide Web Resources Policy
The University, and those who work, teach, and learn here, value the privacy of the
health information you provide us. The Information Security and Privacy Office website explains how we handle the personal information that you share with us as
a patient, health/benefits plan member, or participant in a research study. The website
also provides information explaining the rights you have regarding that information
and how to exercise those rights. We provide the notices to make you aware of these
practices and to comply with the law, including the Health Insurance Portability and
University policies are subject to change. We encourage you to check back for updates
from time to time. If you have additional questions about this privacy statement,
University Webmaster 101 South Wasatch Drive #215 Salt Lake City, UT 84112 (801) 585-7320webmaster@utah.edu
201 Presidents Circle Salt Lake City, UT 84112 801.581.7200
Nondiscrimination Statement - The University of Utah
The University of Utah does not discriminate on the basis of race, ethnicity, color,
religion, national origin, sex, pregnancy, pregnancy-related conditions, age, disability,
sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, genetic information or protected
veteran’s status, in employment, treatment, admission, access to educational programs
and activities, or other University benefits or services.
The University does not discriminate on the basis of sex in the education program
or activity that it operates, as required by Title IX and 34 CFR part 106.  The requirement
not to discriminate in education programs or activities extends to admission and employment.
Inquiries about the application of Title IX and its regulations may be referred to
the Title IX Coordinator, to the Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights,
Additionally, the University endeavors to provide reasonable accommodations and to
ensure equal access to qualified persons with disabilities. Click here to request a reasonable accommodation.
Where discrimination is found to have occurred, the University will take reasonable
steps to investigate the matter, stop the harassment, prevent its recurrence and remedy
If you or someone you know has experienced discrimination, sexual misconduct including
sexual harassment, or disability discrimination, we encourage you to report it to
the University's designated and authorized Title IX/ADA/Section 504 Coordinator in
the Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action:
Sherrie Hayashi, DirectorTitle IX/ADA/Section 504 CoordinatorOffice of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)201 South Presidents Circle, Rm.135 Salt Lake City, UT, 84112801-581-8365 801-585-5746 (fax)oeo@utah.eduwww.oeo.utah.eduOnline reports may be submitted at oeo.utah.edu
To file a formal complaint of discrimination, sexual misconduct (including sexual
harassment or violence), or retaliation, under University of Utah Non-Discrimination
Policy, contact the OEO/AA.   A formal complaint may be filed with the OEO/AA in person,
A Formal Complaint of Sex or Gender-Based Harassment within the scope of Title IX
is timely if at the time of filing a Formal Complaint, the Complainant is participating
in or attempting to participate in a University Program.
A Formal Complaint alleging any other type of Sexual Misconduct, or other type of
Discrimination is timely if filed within 180 calendar days of the last alleged discriminatory
A Formal Complaint of Retaliation is timey filed if filed within 180 days of the last
A Formal Complaint not filed within the appropriate time period above will be dismissed
as untimely filed; however, at the Director's discretion and for good cause, the complaint
may be accepted as if filed within the appropriate time period.
University of UtahOffice of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)201 S. Presidents Circle, Room 135Salt Lake City, UT  84112Telephone: 801-581-8365Fax: 801-585-5746oeo@utah.eduwww.oeo.utah.eduOnline reports may be submitted at oeo.utah.edu
For specific information related to University Policy, please see:
regulations.utah.edu/general/1-012.phpregulations.utah.edu/general/1-011.php
EXTERNAL AGENCIES:  Filing a complaint with the University of Utah’s Title IX/504/ADA Coordinator (or
designee) does not prevent an individual from filing a complaint with an appropriate
regulatory agency. To file a complaint regarding discrimination, including sexual
harassment, or retaliation with a regulatory state or federal agency, please see the
agency information below.  For information about the time frames in which complaints
Education: Complaints regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title IX of the Education
Amendments of 1972, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Title II of the
Americans with Disabilities Act, Age Discrimination Act of 1975.
United States Department of EducationOffice for Civil Rights– Region VIIICesar E. Chavez Memorial Building1244 Speer Boulevard, Suite 310Denver, Colorado 80204-3582Telephone: 303-844-5695FAX: 303-844-4303
Online complaint portal: http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/docs/howto.htmlwww2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/index.html
Employment:State Agency:  Individual complaints regarding: Utah Anti-Discrimination Act of 1965,
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, Age Discrimination in Employment
Act of 1967, as amended, and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. Utah Anti-Discrimination and Labor Division (UALD)160 East 300 South, 3rd floorP.O. Box 146630Salt Lake City, Utah 84114-6630Telephone: 801-530-6801www.laborcommission.utah.gov
Federal Agencies:Complaints regarding: Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, The Pregnancy Discrimination
Act, Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, as amended (ADEA), Equal Pay Act
of 1963, Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act of 2008, Sections
501 and 505 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and Section 102 and 103 of the Civil
Rights Act of 1991, the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 (GINA) Equal Employment Opportunity CommissionPhoenix District Office3300 North Central Avenue, Suite 690Phoenix, AZ 85012Telephone: 1-800-669-4000TTY:  1-800-669-6820Fax: 602-640-5071www.eeoc.gov U.S. Department of LaborOffice of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP)Denver District Office1244 Speer Blvd, Suite 540Denver, CO 80204Phone 720-264-3200Fax:  720-264-3211https://www.dol.gov/ofccp/index.htm Executive Order 11246 (Equal Employment and Affirmative Action)Americans with Disability Act Amendments Act, of 2008Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 197338 USC 4212 – The Vietnam Era Veterans’ Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974Uniformed Service Employment and Re-employment Rights Act (USERRA)Online complaint portal:www.dol.gov/elaws/vets/userra/ee_disc.asp Veteran’s Employment and Training Service140 East 300 South, Room 209Salt Lake City, UT 84111Telephone: 801-526-0950jobs.utah.gov/jobseeker/veterans/employtrain.html
Housing (Residents of dorms and family student housing)State Agency:  Complaints regarding: Utah Fair Housing Act of 1993, as amended.
Utah Anti-Discrimination and Labor Division (UALD)160 East 300 South, 3rd floorSalt Lake City, Utah 84114-6630Telephone: 801-530-6801www.laborcommission.utah.gov Federal Agency:  U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”) Complaints
regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, Title VIII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1968 (Fair Housing Act), Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Action
of 1973, as amended, Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, Age
Discrimination Act of 1975, Title IX of the Education Amendments Act, and Architectural
Barriers Act of 1968. U.S. Department of Housing & Urban Development (HUD)1670 Broadway, 25th floorDenver, Colorado 80202-4801Telephone: (303)672-5440Fax: (303)672-5004Online complaint portal: https://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/topics/housing_discrimination Health care, human services, and health insurance plans (Patients and Participants):  Complaints regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, Title
II of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and the Community Service Assurance
provisions of the Hill-Burton Act U.S. Department of Health & Human ServicesOffice for Civil Rights, DHHS – Region VIII1961 Stout Street Room 08-148Denver, CO 80294Customer Response Center 1-800-368-1019TDD:  1-800-537-7697Email: Ocrmail@hhs.govOnline complaint portal: https://ocrportal.hhs.gov/ocr/smartscreen/main.jsfWebsite: www.hhs.gov/ocrCampus Accessibility Website: https://accessibility.utah.edu
201 Presidents Circle Salt Lake City, UT 84112 801.581.7200
Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Report Discrimination, Harassment or Sexual Misconduct
The Office of Equal Opportunity And Affirmative Action (OEO/AA) is dedicated to providing
a fair and equitable environment for all to pursue their academic and professional
endeavors and to equally access University programs.
The Office of Equal Opportunity/Title IX (OEO/AA) office is open for business; however,
due to the university’s commitment to slow the spread of the Coronavirus and contribute
to the health and well-being of our community, OEO/AA staff are telecommuting until
Our website contains a wealth of information about the policies and processes for
addressing discrimination, harassment, and sexual misconduct.  In addition, you may
You may reach us at (801) 581-8365 or oeo@utah.edu
Thank you for your patience, support, and understanding during this evolving situation.
OEO/AA provides disability, religious, and pregnancy accommodation forms.
Office of Equal Opportunity,  Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Report Discrimination, Harassment or Sexual Misconduct
The Office of Equal Opportunity And Affirmative Action (OEO/AA) is dedicated to providing
a fair and equitable environment for all to pursue their academic and professional
endeavors and to equally access University programs.
The Office of Equal Opportunity/Title IX (OEO/AA) office is open for business; however,
due to the university’s commitment to slow the spread of the Coronavirus and contribute
to the health and well-being of our community, OEO/AA staff are telecommuting until
Our website contains a wealth of information about the policies and processes for
addressing discrimination, harassment, and sexual misconduct.  In addition, you may
You may reach us at (801) 581-8365 or oeo@utah.edu
Thank you for your patience, support, and understanding during this evolving situation.
OEO/AA provides disability, religious, and pregnancy accommodation forms.
Office of Equal Opportunity,  Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Report Discrimination, Harassment or Sexual Misconduct
The Office of Equal Opportunity And Affirmative Action (OEO/AA) is dedicated to providing
a fair and equitable environment for all to pursue their academic and professional
endeavors and to equally access University programs.
The Office of Equal Opportunity/Title IX (OEO/AA) office is open for business; however,
due to the university’s commitment to slow the spread of the Coronavirus and contribute
to the health and well-being of our community, OEO/AA staff are telecommuting until
Our website contains a wealth of information about the policies and processes for
addressing discrimination, harassment, and sexual misconduct.  In addition, you may
You may reach us at (801) 581-8365 or oeo@utah.edu
Thank you for your patience, support, and understanding during this evolving situation.
OEO/AA provides disability, religious, and pregnancy accommodation forms.
Office of Equal Opportunity,  Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Sexual Misconduct - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
current page: Sexual Misconduct
University of Utah policy prohibits sex discrimination, which includes sexual misconduct.
Sexual Misconduct is the most egregious form of sex discrimination. Title IX of the
Education Amendments Act of 1972 is the comprehensive federal law that prohibits discrimination
on the basis of sex in any federally funded education program or activity.
Policies, procedures, and resources are in place to take immediate and appropriate
steps to remedy violations of University policy and the university will take steps
to end or eliminate the hostile environment, prevent its recurrence and to remedy
the effects, as appropriate under each individual’s circumstances.
Complaints of sexual misconduct should be made directly to the Office of Equal Opportunity
Please see the Title IX Coordinator Outreach letter to learn about your specific rights to seek out Supportive Measures and options for
accountability through the OEO/AA process or through law enforcement.
UNIVERSITY TITLE IX COORDINATOR
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112Phone: 801-581-8365Fax: 801-585-5746
As defined by University Rule, R1-012: Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Misconduct
is a broad term used to encompass a range of behaviors including Sexual or Gender-Based
Harassment, Intimate Partner Violence, Sexual Exploitation, Stalking, Nonconsensual
Sexual Contact, and Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration. Sexual Misconduct also includes
the crimes of dating violence, domestic violence, sexual assault and stalking as defined
by state and federal law. Sexual Misconduct is a form of Sex Discrimination. The following
definitions of prohibited conduct apply to University policies.
Sexual or Gender-Based Harassment
As defined by University Rule, R1-012, Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Harassment
means unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical
conduct of a sexual nature or based on an individual’s sex, sexual orientation, gender,
gender identity, or gender expression when:
Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition
of an individual’s employment, education, living environment, health care or participation
in a university program activity;
Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for
or a factor in decisions affecting that individual’s employment, education, living
environment, or participation in a university program or activity; or
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of interfering with an individual’s employment
or educational performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment
for that individual’s employment, education, living environment, or participation
in a university program or activity.
Consent means affirmative, unambiguous, and voluntary agreement. For a nonexhaustive
list of situations in which consent has not been given, see Utah Code Ann. 76-5-406.
means actual or threatened physical violence, intimidation, or other forms of physical
or sexual abuse that would cause a reasonable person to fear harm to self or others.
For this policy, “intimate relationship” means marriage, domestic partnership, engagement,
casual or serious romantic involvement, and dating, whether in a current or former
relationship. Intimate Partner Violence can occur between persons of any sex, sexual
orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, and it can occur in any
type of intimate relationship including monogamous, non-committed, and relationships
involving more than two partners. Intimate Partner Violence can be a single act or
a pattern of behavior. Intimate Partner Violence is sometimes referred to as, and
includes behaviors that would be considered, dating violence, domestic violence, or
relationship abuse. Examples of Intimate Partner Violence include, but are not limited
to, situations in which the following behaviors are directed toward a partner in a
current or former intimate relationship: hitting, kicking, strangling, or other violence;
property damage; and threat of violence to one’s self, one’s partner, or the family
members, friends, pets, or personal property of the partner. Intimate Partner Violence
is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
means any physical contact with another person of a sexual nature without that person’s
Consent. The touching of a person’s intimate parts (such as genitalia, groin, breast,
buttocks, mouth, or clothing covering same); touching a person with one’s own intimate
parts; or forcing a person to touch another’s intimate parts would be violations of
this policy if they occur without Consent. Nonconsensual Sexual Contact is a form
Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration
means the sexual penetration of any bodily opening with any object or body part without
Consent. This could be committed by force, threat, intimidation, or through exploitation of
another’s mental or physical condition (such as lack of consciousness, incapacitation
due to drugs or alcohol, age, or disability) of which the Respondent was actually
aware or which a reasonable person in the Respondent’s position should have been aware.
Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
means treating someone differently, i.e., disadvantaging the person, on the basis
of sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression when:
such conduct adversely affects a term or condition of an individual’s employment,
education, living environment, or participation in a University program or activity;
a person’s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity or expression is used
as the basis for or a factor in decisions affecting that individual’s employment,
education, living environment, health care, or participation in a University program
means any physical sexual act perpetrated against a person’s will or where a person
is incapable of giving consent (e.g., due to age or use of drugs or alcohol, or because
an intellectual or other disability prevents the person from having the capacity to
means engaging in a course of conduct directed at a specific person and based on that’s
person’s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, that
would cause a reasonable person to fear for the person’s safety or the safety of others
or suffer substantial emotional distress. Stalking is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
Discussion of issues or theories relating to sexuality or gender in an academic or
professional setting, when appropriate to subject matter, will be presumed not to
constitute sexual harassment even if it offends or embarrasses an individual unless
other factors are involved. Such factors include targeting the discussion to an individual
or carrying out the discussion in terms that are both patently unnecessary and gratuitously
Under university policy, most University employees are required to report situations
involving sexual misconduct and discrimination to the Office of Equal Opportunity
and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)
Some situations may be very personal; we respect your privacy and will protect it
in accordance with University of Utah policy and FERPA. Although information about
the situation may be reported to the OEO/AA, you have the right to choose to whom
you speak, what you say, when you say it and what resources you use. If you prefer
to speak first with a confidential resource (confidential resources are not required
to report information to the OEO/AA, you may contact one of the groups below.
Information provided to OEO/AA is considered private information and will only be shared with other appropriate university personnel on
a very strict need-to-know basis.
A collection of sites and areas containing additional information
Information about Sexual Assault Awareness & Response Support
Office of Equal Opportunity,  Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Prohibited Discrimination - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Current Page: Prohibited Discrimination
Discrimination is partiality or bias in the treatment of a person or group that is
unfair or violates law or policy. Treating someone differently based on a protected class violates University policy. A protected class is a group of people protected against
discrimination by University policy or by state and federal law.
icon Color icon Raceicon Ethnicityicon National Originicon Ageicon Religionicon Disabilityicon Veteran Statusicon Pregnancy icon Sexicon Sexual Orientationicon Gender Identityicon Gender Expressionicon Genetic Information
Not all discrimination violates law or policy. One can be subject to unfair treatment
that does not violate University policy or state or federal law. An example would
be being treated unfairly because someone doesn’t like you or because of your political
What is Discriminatory Harassment?
The University’s nondiscrimination policy applies broadly to students, employees,
and visitors. Hostile environment is a commonly used term but from a legal and policy
perspective, a hostile environment is a form of discriminatory harassment.
Harassment means unwelcome or offensive conduct which has the purpose or effect of
interfering with an individuals’ work or academic environment or creating an intimidating
hostile, offensive or otherwise working or learning environment based upon a person’s
race, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, religion, sexual orientation,
gender identity, gender expression, or protected veteran’s status. The University’s
Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA) is responsible for the
University’s nondiscrimination policies.
Many people have heard the term “hostile environment” in the context of sexual harassment
but a “hostile environment” can also include harassment because of race, color, national
origin, age, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression and
protected veteran’s status. For harassment not related to discrimination, contact
What constitutes a hostile environment? What are the range of scenarios that people
A hostile environment can be created in many ways. Verbal comments, text messages,
pictures, graphics, graffiti and physical conduct can create a hostile environment.
This might look like racial slurs, comments about a person’s national origin, or behavior
or words that mock, demean, put down, disparage, threaten or ridicule others based
upon race, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, religion, sexual orientation,
gender identity/expression and protected veteran’s status.
An isolated statement, even if rude and offensive, generally does not constitute a
hostile environment. Occasional insensitive and off-hand comments, even if inappropriate
or unprofessional, will generally not create a hostile environment. The focus is whether
the behavior, as a whole, affecting a person’s education or working environment. In order to interfere with a person’s work or educational environment, generally
the conduct must be severe, recurring and pervasive so that it interferes with your
ability to fulfill your work and academic pursuits.
Although an occasional comment may not constitute a violation of the University’s
nondiscrimination policy, other provisions of University policy governing student
and employee conduct may apply. It is important to mention that the University, in
terms of student, visitor, and employee conduct, has an interest in preventing discrimination
and harassment. For example, if a department has an employee who tells an inappropriate
joke then other employees begin to participate in similar types of comments, believing
that such behavior is condoned, the workplace can then develop into a hostile environment
for those that find such conduct unwelcome and offensive.
If someone feels like they are experiencing a hostile environment, what options are
open to them to deal with the situation?
The first step is to tell the individual that their comments are unwelcome and unwanted.
Sometimes this may be difficult but once you have made it clear that their comments
are not welcome, the individual has clearly been notified that you find their behavior
unwelcome and offensive. Once the individual clearly understands the behavior isn’t
welcome yet continues to engage in similar behavior, disciplinary action may be appropriate.
There are many options on the University campus that can assist you in addressing
the unwanted and unwelcome behavior. The Office of the Dean of Students, Human Resources, and the Office of Equal Opportunity are all avenues that can assist you in addressing
How are issues like these handled to protect the person dealing with hostility while
also being fair to the Respondent?
The Office of Equal Opportunity is neutral and impartial whose purpose in an investigation
is to determine the facts. Both parties are provided an opportunity to provide their
side of the story. Obtaining both the perspective of the person dealing with the hostility
as well as the person alleged to have engaged in the behavior is important in terms
of treating both parties fairly. Although both parties are given an opportunity to
provide their side of the story, it is important to remember that it doesn’t matter
whether the behavior was intended to hurt the other individual. An investigation by
the Office of Equal Opportunity would look at whether a reasonable person would take
offense to the unwanted or unwelcome behavior.
University policy prohibits retaliation against an individual for having made a complaint,
testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, hearing, or
proceeding under the University’s nondiscrimination policies or for interfering with
the rights of individuals under the University’s nondiscrimination policies.
Examples of retaliation include:
demoting, disciplining, or harassing an employee because the employee files or reports
discrimination or sexual misconduct to OEO/AA
interfering with witnesses or others who may be interviewed as part of an investigation
giving a lower grade because a student does not accede to sexual advances
If you believe you have experienced discriminatory conduct, including sexual misconduct,
or retaliation, you may file a complaint with our office.
Office of Equal Opportunity,  Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Title IX Training Materials - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
current page: Title IX Training Materials
Posting of Title IX Training Materials:
Consistent with Department of Education Title IX regulatory requirements, the following
training materials are being made available for inspection.  The materials below have
been used to train Title IX Coordinators, investigators, decision-makers, and any
person who facilitates an informal resolution process for training completed on or
after August 14, 2020.  In some instances the Office of Equal Opportunity is providing
material from training prior to August 14, 2020, where the material is available and
the holder of the copyright provided permission to post the material for inspection.
Materials presented may copyrighted by author(s). Materials are not to be downloaded,
shared, or used for purposes other than review under than purposed listed in Section
106.45(b)(1)(iii) & § 106.45(b)(10)(i)(D) of Title IX, Education Amendments Act.
NASPA:  Track 1:  Title IX Coordinators
NASPA:  Track 2:  Title IX Decision-makers and Student Conduct Administrators
NAPSA: Facilitating Fair and Effective Informal Resolution Processes
University of Utah Hearing Training for Committee Members
Title IX Hearings and Appeals for Decision-Makers
Hearing Committee and University Appointed Advisory Training
Training for Title IX Coordinators and Investigators:
Employee Reporting and Training Requirements
Formal Complaints Jurisdiction and Associated Procedures
Title IX Hearings and Appeals for Decision-Makers
Title IX Coordinator Training: Pregnancy or Pregnancy-Related Conditions
Office of Equal Opportunity,  Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Sexual Misconduct - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
current page: Sexual Misconduct
University of Utah policy prohibits sex discrimination, which includes sexual misconduct.
Sexual Misconduct is the most egregious form of sex discrimination. Title IX of the
Education Amendments Act of 1972 is the comprehensive federal law that prohibits discrimination
on the basis of sex in any federally funded education program or activity.
Policies, procedures, and resources are in place to take immediate and appropriate
steps to remedy violations of University policy and the university will take steps
to end or eliminate the hostile environment, prevent its recurrence and to remedy
the effects, as appropriate under each individual’s circumstances.
Complaints of sexual misconduct should be made directly to the Office of Equal Opportunity
Please see the Title IX Coordinator Outreach letter to learn about your specific rights to seek out Supportive Measures and options for
accountability through the OEO/AA process or through law enforcement.
UNIVERSITY TITLE IX COORDINATOR
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112Phone: 801-581-8365Fax: 801-585-5746
As defined by University Rule, R1-012: Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Misconduct
is a broad term used to encompass a range of behaviors including Sexual or Gender-Based
Harassment, Intimate Partner Violence, Sexual Exploitation, Stalking, Nonconsensual
Sexual Contact, and Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration. Sexual Misconduct also includes
the crimes of dating violence, domestic violence, sexual assault and stalking as defined
by state and federal law. Sexual Misconduct is a form of Sex Discrimination. The following
definitions of prohibited conduct apply to University policies.
Sexual or Gender-Based Harassment
As defined by University Rule, R1-012, Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Harassment
means unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical
conduct of a sexual nature or based on an individual’s sex, sexual orientation, gender,
gender identity, or gender expression when:
Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition
of an individual’s employment, education, living environment, health care or participation
in a university program activity;
Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for
or a factor in decisions affecting that individual’s employment, education, living
environment, or participation in a university program or activity; or
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of interfering with an individual’s employment
or educational performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment
for that individual’s employment, education, living environment, or participation
in a university program or activity.
Consent means affirmative, unambiguous, and voluntary agreement. For a nonexhaustive
list of situations in which consent has not been given, see Utah Code Ann. 76-5-406.
means actual or threatened physical violence, intimidation, or other forms of physical
or sexual abuse that would cause a reasonable person to fear harm to self or others.
For this policy, “intimate relationship” means marriage, domestic partnership, engagement,
casual or serious romantic involvement, and dating, whether in a current or former
relationship. Intimate Partner Violence can occur between persons of any sex, sexual
orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, and it can occur in any
type of intimate relationship including monogamous, non-committed, and relationships
involving more than two partners. Intimate Partner Violence can be a single act or
a pattern of behavior. Intimate Partner Violence is sometimes referred to as, and
includes behaviors that would be considered, dating violence, domestic violence, or
relationship abuse. Examples of Intimate Partner Violence include, but are not limited
to, situations in which the following behaviors are directed toward a partner in a
current or former intimate relationship: hitting, kicking, strangling, or other violence;
property damage; and threat of violence to one’s self, one’s partner, or the family
members, friends, pets, or personal property of the partner. Intimate Partner Violence
is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
means any physical contact with another person of a sexual nature without that person’s
Consent. The touching of a person’s intimate parts (such as genitalia, groin, breast,
buttocks, mouth, or clothing covering same); touching a person with one’s own intimate
parts; or forcing a person to touch another’s intimate parts would be violations of
this policy if they occur without Consent. Nonconsensual Sexual Contact is a form
Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration
means the sexual penetration of any bodily opening with any object or body part without
Consent. This could be committed by force, threat, intimidation, or through exploitation of
another’s mental or physical condition (such as lack of consciousness, incapacitation
due to drugs or alcohol, age, or disability) of which the Respondent was actually
aware or which a reasonable person in the Respondent’s position should have been aware.
Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
means treating someone differently, i.e., disadvantaging the person, on the basis
of sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression when:
such conduct adversely affects a term or condition of an individual’s employment,
education, living environment, or participation in a University program or activity;
a person’s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity or expression is used
as the basis for or a factor in decisions affecting that individual’s employment,
education, living environment, health care, or participation in a University program
means any physical sexual act perpetrated against a person’s will or where a person
is incapable of giving consent (e.g., due to age or use of drugs or alcohol, or because
an intellectual or other disability prevents the person from having the capacity to
means engaging in a course of conduct directed at a specific person and based on that’s
person’s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, that
would cause a reasonable person to fear for the person’s safety or the safety of others
or suffer substantial emotional distress. Stalking is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
Discussion of issues or theories relating to sexuality or gender in an academic or
professional setting, when appropriate to subject matter, will be presumed not to
constitute sexual harassment even if it offends or embarrasses an individual unless
other factors are involved. Such factors include targeting the discussion to an individual
or carrying out the discussion in terms that are both patently unnecessary and gratuitously
Under university policy, most University employees are required to report situations
involving sexual misconduct and discrimination to the Office of Equal Opportunity
and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)
Some situations may be very personal; we respect your privacy and will protect it
in accordance with University of Utah policy and FERPA. Although information about
the situation may be reported to the OEO/AA, you have the right to choose to whom
you speak, what you say, when you say it and what resources you use. If you prefer
to speak first with a confidential resource (confidential resources are not required
to report information to the OEO/AA, you may contact one of the groups below.
Information provided to OEO/AA is considered private information and will only be shared with other appropriate university personnel on
a very strict need-to-know basis.
A collection of sites and areas containing additional information
Information about Sexual Assault Awareness & Response Support
Office of Equal Opportunity,  Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Prohibited Discrimination - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Current Page: Prohibited Discrimination
Discrimination is partiality or bias in the treatment of a person or group that is
unfair or violates law or policy. Treating someone differently based on a protected class violates University policy. A protected class is a group of people protected against
discrimination by University policy or by state and federal law.
icon Color icon Raceicon Ethnicityicon National Originicon Ageicon Religionicon Disabilityicon Veteran Statusicon Pregnancy icon Sexicon Sexual Orientationicon Gender Identityicon Gender Expressionicon Genetic Information
Not all discrimination violates law or policy. One can be subject to unfair treatment
that does not violate University policy or state or federal law. An example would
be being treated unfairly because someone doesn’t like you or because of your political
What is Discriminatory Harassment?
The University’s nondiscrimination policy applies broadly to students, employees,
and visitors. Hostile environment is a commonly used term but from a legal and policy
perspective, a hostile environment is a form of discriminatory harassment.
Harassment means unwelcome or offensive conduct which has the purpose or effect of
interfering with an individuals’ work or academic environment or creating an intimidating
hostile, offensive or otherwise working or learning environment based upon a person’s
race, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, religion, sexual orientation,
gender identity, gender expression, or protected veteran’s status. The University’s
Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA) is responsible for the
University’s nondiscrimination policies.
Many people have heard the term “hostile environment” in the context of sexual harassment
but a “hostile environment” can also include harassment because of race, color, national
origin, age, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression and
protected veteran’s status. For harassment not related to discrimination, contact
What constitutes a hostile environment? What are the range of scenarios that people
A hostile environment can be created in many ways. Verbal comments, text messages,
pictures, graphics, graffiti and physical conduct can create a hostile environment.
This might look like racial slurs, comments about a person’s national origin, or behavior
or words that mock, demean, put down, disparage, threaten or ridicule others based
upon race, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, religion, sexual orientation,
gender identity/expression and protected veteran’s status.
An isolated statement, even if rude and offensive, generally does not constitute a
hostile environment. Occasional insensitive and off-hand comments, even if inappropriate
or unprofessional, will generally not create a hostile environment. The focus is whether
the behavior, as a whole, affecting a person’s education or working environment. In order to interfere with a person’s work or educational environment, generally
the conduct must be severe, recurring and pervasive so that it interferes with your
ability to fulfill your work and academic pursuits.
Although an occasional comment may not constitute a violation of the University’s
nondiscrimination policy, other provisions of University policy governing student
and employee conduct may apply. It is important to mention that the University, in
terms of student, visitor, and employee conduct, has an interest in preventing discrimination
and harassment. For example, if a department has an employee who tells an inappropriate
joke then other employees begin to participate in similar types of comments, believing
that such behavior is condoned, the workplace can then develop into a hostile environment
for those that find such conduct unwelcome and offensive.
If someone feels like they are experiencing a hostile environment, what options are
open to them to deal with the situation?
The first step is to tell the individual that their comments are unwelcome and unwanted.
Sometimes this may be difficult but once you have made it clear that their comments
are not welcome, the individual has clearly been notified that you find their behavior
unwelcome and offensive. Once the individual clearly understands the behavior isn’t
welcome yet continues to engage in similar behavior, disciplinary action may be appropriate.
There are many options on the University campus that can assist you in addressing
the unwanted and unwelcome behavior. The Office of the Dean of Students, Human Resources, and the Office of Equal Opportunity are all avenues that can assist you in addressing
How are issues like these handled to protect the person dealing with hostility while
also being fair to the Respondent?
The Office of Equal Opportunity is neutral and impartial whose purpose in an investigation
is to determine the facts. Both parties are provided an opportunity to provide their
side of the story. Obtaining both the perspective of the person dealing with the hostility
as well as the person alleged to have engaged in the behavior is important in terms
of treating both parties fairly. Although both parties are given an opportunity to
provide their side of the story, it is important to remember that it doesn’t matter
whether the behavior was intended to hurt the other individual. An investigation by
the Office of Equal Opportunity would look at whether a reasonable person would take
offense to the unwanted or unwelcome behavior.
University policy prohibits retaliation against an individual for having made a complaint,
testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, hearing, or
proceeding under the University’s nondiscrimination policies or for interfering with
the rights of individuals under the University’s nondiscrimination policies.
Examples of retaliation include:
demoting, disciplining, or harassing an employee because the employee files or reports
discrimination or sexual misconduct to OEO/AA
interfering with witnesses or others who may be interviewed as part of an investigation
giving a lower grade because a student does not accede to sexual advances
If you believe you have experienced discriminatory conduct, including sexual misconduct,
or retaliation, you may file a complaint with our office.
Office of Equal Opportunity,  Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Title IX Training Materials - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
current page: Title IX Training Materials
Posting of Title IX Training Materials:
Consistent with Department of Education Title IX regulatory requirements, the following
training materials are being made available for inspection.  The materials below have
been used to train Title IX Coordinators, investigators, decision-makers, and any
person who facilitates an informal resolution process for training completed on or
after August 14, 2020.  In some instances the Office of Equal Opportunity is providing
material from training prior to August 14, 2020, where the material is available and
the holder of the copyright provided permission to post the material for inspection.
Materials presented may copyrighted by author(s). Materials are not to be downloaded,
shared, or used for purposes other than review under than purposed listed in Section
106.45(b)(1)(iii) & § 106.45(b)(10)(i)(D) of Title IX, Education Amendments Act.
NASPA:  Track 1:  Title IX Coordinators
NASPA:  Track 2:  Title IX Decision-makers and Student Conduct Administrators
NAPSA: Facilitating Fair and Effective Informal Resolution Processes
University of Utah Hearing Training for Committee Members
Title IX Hearings and Appeals for Decision-Makers
Hearing Committee and University Appointed Advisory Training
Training for Title IX Coordinators and Investigators:
Employee Reporting and Training Requirements
Formal Complaints Jurisdiction and Associated Procedures
Title IX Hearings and Appeals for Decision-Makers
Title IX Coordinator Training: Pregnancy or Pregnancy-Related Conditions
Office of Equal Opportunity,  Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Sexual Misconduct - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
current page: Sexual Misconduct
University of Utah policy prohibits sex discrimination, which includes sexual misconduct.
Sexual Misconduct is the most egregious form of sex discrimination. Title IX of the
Education Amendments Act of 1972 is the comprehensive federal law that prohibits discrimination
on the basis of sex in any federally funded education program or activity.
Policies, procedures, and resources are in place to take immediate and appropriate
steps to remedy violations of University policy and the university will take steps
to end or eliminate the hostile environment, prevent its recurrence and to remedy
the effects, as appropriate under each individual’s circumstances.
Complaints of sexual misconduct should be made directly to the Office of Equal Opportunity
Please see the Title IX Coordinator Outreach letter to learn about your specific rights to seek out Supportive Measures and options for
accountability through the OEO/AA process or through law enforcement.
UNIVERSITY TITLE IX COORDINATOR
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112Phone: 801-581-8365Fax: 801-585-5746
As defined by University Rule, R1-012: Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Misconduct
is a broad term used to encompass a range of behaviors including Sexual or Gender-Based
Harassment, Intimate Partner Violence, Sexual Exploitation, Stalking, Nonconsensual
Sexual Contact, and Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration. Sexual Misconduct also includes
the crimes of dating violence, domestic violence, sexual assault and stalking as defined
by state and federal law. Sexual Misconduct is a form of Sex Discrimination. The following
definitions of prohibited conduct apply to University policies.
Sexual or Gender-Based Harassment
As defined by University Rule, R1-012, Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Harassment
means unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical
conduct of a sexual nature or based on an individual’s sex, sexual orientation, gender,
gender identity, or gender expression when:
Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition
of an individual’s employment, education, living environment, health care or participation
in a university program activity;
Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for
or a factor in decisions affecting that individual’s employment, education, living
environment, or participation in a university program or activity; or
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of interfering with an individual’s employment
or educational performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment
for that individual’s employment, education, living environment, or participation
in a university program or activity.
Consent means affirmative, unambiguous, and voluntary agreement. For a nonexhaustive
list of situations in which consent has not been given, see Utah Code Ann. 76-5-406.
means actual or threatened physical violence, intimidation, or other forms of physical
or sexual abuse that would cause a reasonable person to fear harm to self or others.
For this policy, “intimate relationship” means marriage, domestic partnership, engagement,
casual or serious romantic involvement, and dating, whether in a current or former
relationship. Intimate Partner Violence can occur between persons of any sex, sexual
orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, and it can occur in any
type of intimate relationship including monogamous, non-committed, and relationships
involving more than two partners. Intimate Partner Violence can be a single act or
a pattern of behavior. Intimate Partner Violence is sometimes referred to as, and
includes behaviors that would be considered, dating violence, domestic violence, or
relationship abuse. Examples of Intimate Partner Violence include, but are not limited
to, situations in which the following behaviors are directed toward a partner in a
current or former intimate relationship: hitting, kicking, strangling, or other violence;
property damage; and threat of violence to one’s self, one’s partner, or the family
members, friends, pets, or personal property of the partner. Intimate Partner Violence
is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
means any physical contact with another person of a sexual nature without that person’s
Consent. The touching of a person’s intimate parts (such as genitalia, groin, breast,
buttocks, mouth, or clothing covering same); touching a person with one’s own intimate
parts; or forcing a person to touch another’s intimate parts would be violations of
this policy if they occur without Consent. Nonconsensual Sexual Contact is a form
Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration
means the sexual penetration of any bodily opening with any object or body part without
Consent. This could be committed by force, threat, intimidation, or through exploitation of
another’s mental or physical condition (such as lack of consciousness, incapacitation
due to drugs or alcohol, age, or disability) of which the Respondent was actually
aware or which a reasonable person in the Respondent’s position should have been aware.
Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
means treating someone differently, i.e., disadvantaging the person, on the basis
of sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression when:
such conduct adversely affects a term or condition of an individual’s employment,
education, living environment, or participation in a University program or activity;
a person’s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity or expression is used
as the basis for or a factor in decisions affecting that individual’s employment,
education, living environment, health care, or participation in a University program
means any physical sexual act perpetrated against a person’s will or where a person
is incapable of giving consent (e.g., due to age or use of drugs or alcohol, or because
an intellectual or other disability prevents the person from having the capacity to
means engaging in a course of conduct directed at a specific person and based on that’s
person’s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, that
would cause a reasonable person to fear for the person’s safety or the safety of others
or suffer substantial emotional distress. Stalking is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
Discussion of issues or theories relating to sexuality or gender in an academic or
professional setting, when appropriate to subject matter, will be presumed not to
constitute sexual harassment even if it offends or embarrasses an individual unless
other factors are involved. Such factors include targeting the discussion to an individual
or carrying out the discussion in terms that are both patently unnecessary and gratuitously
Under university policy, most University employees are required to report situations
involving sexual misconduct and discrimination to the Office of Equal Opportunity
and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)
Some situations may be very personal; we respect your privacy and will protect it
in accordance with University of Utah policy and FERPA. Although information about
the situation may be reported to the OEO/AA, you have the right to choose to whom
you speak, what you say, when you say it and what resources you use. If you prefer
to speak first with a confidential resource (confidential resources are not required
to report information to the OEO/AA, you may contact one of the groups below.
Information provided to OEO/AA is considered private information and will only be shared with other appropriate university personnel on
a very strict need-to-know basis.
A collection of sites and areas containing additional information
Information about Sexual Assault Awareness & Response Support
Office of Equal Opportunity,  Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Prohibited Discrimination - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Current Page: Prohibited Discrimination
Discrimination is partiality or bias in the treatment of a person or group that is
unfair or violates law or policy. Treating someone differently based on a protected class violates University policy. A protected class is a group of people protected against
discrimination by University policy or by state and federal law.
icon Color icon Raceicon Ethnicityicon National Originicon Ageicon Religionicon Disabilityicon Veteran Statusicon Pregnancy icon Sexicon Sexual Orientationicon Gender Identityicon Gender Expressionicon Genetic Information
Not all discrimination violates law or policy. One can be subject to unfair treatment
that does not violate University policy or state or federal law. An example would
be being treated unfairly because someone doesn’t like you or because of your political
What is Discriminatory Harassment?
The University’s nondiscrimination policy applies broadly to students, employees,
and visitors. Hostile environment is a commonly used term but from a legal and policy
perspective, a hostile environment is a form of discriminatory harassment.
Harassment means unwelcome or offensive conduct which has the purpose or effect of
interfering with an individuals’ work or academic environment or creating an intimidating
hostile, offensive or otherwise working or learning environment based upon a person’s
race, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, religion, sexual orientation,
gender identity, gender expression, or protected veteran’s status. The University’s
Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA) is responsible for the
University’s nondiscrimination policies.
Many people have heard the term “hostile environment” in the context of sexual harassment
but a “hostile environment” can also include harassment because of race, color, national
origin, age, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression and
protected veteran’s status. For harassment not related to discrimination, contact
What constitutes a hostile environment? What are the range of scenarios that people
A hostile environment can be created in many ways. Verbal comments, text messages,
pictures, graphics, graffiti and physical conduct can create a hostile environment.
This might look like racial slurs, comments about a person’s national origin, or behavior
or words that mock, demean, put down, disparage, threaten or ridicule others based
upon race, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, religion, sexual orientation,
gender identity/expression and protected veteran’s status.
An isolated statement, even if rude and offensive, generally does not constitute a
hostile environment. Occasional insensitive and off-hand comments, even if inappropriate
or unprofessional, will generally not create a hostile environment. The focus is whether
the behavior, as a whole, affecting a person’s education or working environment. In order to interfere with a person’s work or educational environment, generally
the conduct must be severe, recurring and pervasive so that it interferes with your
ability to fulfill your work and academic pursuits.
Although an occasional comment may not constitute a violation of the University’s
nondiscrimination policy, other provisions of University policy governing student
and employee conduct may apply. It is important to mention that the University, in
terms of student, visitor, and employee conduct, has an interest in preventing discrimination
and harassment. For example, if a department has an employee who tells an inappropriate
joke then other employees begin to participate in similar types of comments, believing
that such behavior is condoned, the workplace can then develop into a hostile environment
for those that find such conduct unwelcome and offensive.
If someone feels like they are experiencing a hostile environment, what options are
open to them to deal with the situation?
The first step is to tell the individual that their comments are unwelcome and unwanted.
Sometimes this may be difficult but once you have made it clear that their comments
are not welcome, the individual has clearly been notified that you find their behavior
unwelcome and offensive. Once the individual clearly understands the behavior isn’t
welcome yet continues to engage in similar behavior, disciplinary action may be appropriate.
There are many options on the University campus that can assist you in addressing
the unwanted and unwelcome behavior. The Office of the Dean of Students, Human Resources, and the Office of Equal Opportunity are all avenues that can assist you in addressing
How are issues like these handled to protect the person dealing with hostility while
also being fair to the Respondent?
The Office of Equal Opportunity is neutral and impartial whose purpose in an investigation
is to determine the facts. Both parties are provided an opportunity to provide their
side of the story. Obtaining both the perspective of the person dealing with the hostility
as well as the person alleged to have engaged in the behavior is important in terms
of treating both parties fairly. Although both parties are given an opportunity to
provide their side of the story, it is important to remember that it doesn’t matter
whether the behavior was intended to hurt the other individual. An investigation by
the Office of Equal Opportunity would look at whether a reasonable person would take
offense to the unwanted or unwelcome behavior.
University policy prohibits retaliation against an individual for having made a complaint,
testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, hearing, or
proceeding under the University’s nondiscrimination policies or for interfering with
the rights of individuals under the University’s nondiscrimination policies.
Examples of retaliation include:
demoting, disciplining, or harassing an employee because the employee files or reports
discrimination or sexual misconduct to OEO/AA
interfering with witnesses or others who may be interviewed as part of an investigation
giving a lower grade because a student does not accede to sexual advances
If you believe you have experienced discriminatory conduct, including sexual misconduct,
or retaliation, you may file a complaint with our office.
Office of Equal Opportunity,  Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Nondiscrimination Statement - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Student Leadership & Involvement
Student Leadership & Involvement
Current Page: Nondiscrimination Statement
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility Statement
The University of Utah does not discriminate on the basis of race, ethnicity, color,
religion, national origin, sex, pregnancy, pregnancy-related conditions, age, disability,
sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, genetic information or protected
veteran’s status, in employment, treatment, admission, access to educational programs
and activities, or other University benefits or services.
The University does not discriminate on the basis of sex in the education program
or activity that it operates, as required by Title IX and 34 CFR part 106.  The requirement
not to discriminate in education programs or activities extends to admission and employment.
Inquiries about the application of Title IX and its regulations may be referred to
the Title IX Coordinator, to the Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights,
Additionally, the University endeavors to provide reasonable accommodations and to
ensure equal access to qualified persons with disabilities. Click here to request a reasonable accommodation.
Where discrimination is found to have occurred, the University will take reasonable
steps to investigate the matter, stop the harassment, prevent its recurrence and remedy
If you or someone you know has experienced discrimination, sexual misconduct including
sexual harassment, or disability discrimination, we encourage you to report it to
the University's designated and authorized Title IX/ADA/Section 504 Coordinator in
the Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action:
Sherrie Hayashi, DirectorTitle IX/ADA/Section 504 CoordinatorOffice of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)201 South Presidents Circle, Rm.135 Salt Lake City, UT, 84112801-581-8365 801-585-5746 (fax)oeo@utah.eduwww.oeo.utah.eduOnline reports may be submitted at oeo.utah.edu
To file a formal complaint of discrimination, sexual misconduct (including sexual
harassment or violence), or retaliation, under University of Utah Non-Discrimination
Policy, contact the OEO/AA.   A formal complaint may be filed with the OEO/AA in person,
by mail, or by electronic mail.
A Formal Complaint of Sex or Gender-Based Harassment within the scope of Title IX
is timely if at the time of filing a Formal Complaint, the Complainant is participating
in or attempting to participate in a University Program.
A Formal Complaint alleging any other type of Sexual Misconduct, or other type of
Discrimination is timely if filed within 180 calendar days of the last alleged discriminatory
A Formal Complaint of Retaliation is timey filed if filed within 180 days of the last
A Formal Complaint not filed within the appropriate time period above will be dismissed
as untimely filed; however, at the Director's discretion and for good cause, the complaint
may be accepted as if filed within the appropriate time period.
University of UtahOffice of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)201 S. Presidents Circle, Room 135Salt Lake City, UT  84112Telephone: 801-581-8365Fax: 801-585-5746oeo@utah.eduwww.oeo.utah.eduOnline reports may be submitted at oeo.utah.edu
For specific information related to University Policy, please see:
regulations.utah.edu/general/1-012.phpregulations.utah.edu/general/1-011.php
EXTERNAL AGENCIES:  Filing a complaint with the University of Utah’s Title IX/504/ADA Coordinator (or
designee) does not prevent an individual from filing a complaint with an appropriate
regulatory agency. To file a complaint regarding discrimination, including sexual
harassment, or retaliation with a regulatory state or federal agency, please see the
agency information below.  For information about the time frames in which complaints
must be filed, please contact the relevant agency.
Education: Complaints regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title IX of the Education
Amendments of 1972, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Title II of the
Americans with Disabilities Act, Age Discrimination Act of 1975.
United States Department of EducationOffice for Civil Rights– Region VIIICesar E. Chavez Memorial Building1244 Speer Boulevard, Suite 310Denver, Colorado 80204-3582Telephone: 303-844-5695FAX: 303-844-4303
Online complaint portal: http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/docs/howto.htmlwww2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/index.html
Employment:State Agency:  Individual complaints regarding: Utah Anti-Discrimination Act of 1965,
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, Age Discrimination in Employment
Act of 1967, as amended, and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. Utah Anti-Discrimination and Labor Division (UALD)160 East 300 South, 3rd floorP.O. Box 146630Salt Lake City, Utah 84114-6630Telephone: 801-530-6801www.laborcommission.utah.gov
Federal Agencies:Complaints regarding: Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, The Pregnancy Discrimination
Act, Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, as amended (ADEA), Equal Pay Act
of 1963, Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act of 2008, Sections
501 and 505 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and Section 102 and 103 of the Civil
Rights Act of 1991, the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 (GINA) Equal Employment Opportunity CommissionPhoenix District Office3300 North Central Avenue, Suite 690Phoenix, AZ 85012Telephone: 1-800-669-4000TTY:  1-800-669-6820Fax: 602-640-5071www.eeoc.gov U.S. Department of LaborOffice of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP)Denver District Office1244 Speer Blvd, Suite 540Denver, CO 80204Phone 720-264-3200Fax:  720-264-3211https://www.dol.gov/ofccp/index.htm Executive Order 11246 (Equal Employment and Affirmative Action)Americans with Disability Act Amendments Act, of 2008Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 197338 USC 4212 – The Vietnam Era Veterans’ Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974Uniformed Service Employment and Re-employment Rights Act (USERRA)Online complaint portal:www.dol.gov/elaws/vets/userra/ee_disc.asp Veteran’s Employment and Training Service140 East 300 South, Room 209Salt Lake City, UT 84111Telephone: 801-526-0950jobs.utah.gov/jobseeker/veterans/employtrain.html
Housing (Residents of dorms and family student housing)State Agency:  Complaints regarding: Utah Fair Housing Act of 1993, as amended.
Utah Anti-Discrimination and Labor Division (UALD)160 East 300 South, 3rd floorSalt Lake City, Utah 84114-6630Telephone: 801-530-6801www.laborcommission.utah.gov Federal Agency:  U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”) Complaints
regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, Title VIII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1968 (Fair Housing Act), Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Action
of 1973, as amended, Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, Age
Discrimination Act of 1975, Title IX of the Education Amendments Act, and Architectural
Barriers Act of 1968. U.S. Department of Housing & Urban Development (HUD)1670 Broadway, 25th floorDenver, Colorado 80202-4801Telephone: (303)672-5440Fax: (303)672-5004Online complaint portal: https://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/topics/housing_discrimination Health care, human services, and health insurance plans (Patients and Participants):  Complaints regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, Title
II of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and the Community Service Assurance
provisions of the Hill-Burton Act U.S. Department of Health & Human ServicesOffice for Civil Rights, DHHS – Region VIII1961 Stout Street Room 08-148Denver, CO 80294Customer Response Center 1-800-368-1019TDD:  1-800-537-7697Email: Ocrmail@hhs.govOnline complaint portal: https://ocrportal.hhs.gov/ocr/smartscreen/main.jsfWebsite: www.hhs.gov/ocrCampus Accessibility Website: https://accessibility.utah.edu
201 Presidents Circle Salt Lake City, UT 84112 801.581.7200
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
The University of Utah is committed to maintaining a professional working and learning environment for all.
THE UNIVERSITY OF UTAH IS COMMITTED TO MAINTAINING A PROFESSIONAL WORKING AND LEARNING ENVIRONMENT FOR ALL.
The Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action, which also oversees Title IX, is entrusted with protecting this environment and accomplishes this by implementing and enforcing policies on nondiscrimination. The institution’s disciplinary process is designed to:
DETERMINE IF INSTITUTIONAL POLICY HAS BEEN VIOLATED
PROTECT INDIVIDUALS IN THE CAMPUS COMMUNITY FROM FURTHER
OEO/Title IX conducts investigations into allegations of discrimination or sexual misconduct.  When a violation of university policy has occurred, sanctions may be implemented by the appropriate sanctioning body.
Incidents reported to OEO/Title IX are generally not reported to the police (exceptions may occur when circumstances raise concerns of safety of others, including the broader campus community). Incidents reported to the University of Utah police are reported to OEO/Title IX.
Criminal and university administrative processes are independent of one another and may result in different outcomes and resolutions.
When an incident of discrimination or sexual misconduct occurs, it should be reported to OEO/Title IX. Once the office receives information about an incident, OEO/Title IX begins to review and determine how to respond to the reported incident:
When OEO/Title IX becomes aware of an incident of discrimination or sexual misconduct, the office immediately begins to explore the issue further to determine the appropriate steps to take based upon the information reported.
OEO/Title IX immediately connects individuals with information about supportive measures, resources and information about filing options, including how to file a formal complaint with OEO/AA and law enforcement, if applicable.
Upon gathering more information about the incident, OEO/Title IX will assess whether it has a duty to warn the campus community and/or take other actions, as necessary.
After an initial review, OEO/Title IX will determine whether the complaint states sufficient facts demonstrating that a violation of university policy may have occurred. If the complaint states facts that, if proven, would be a violation of the  discrimination policy, an  investigation will move forward. If not, the complaint will be dismissed.
A complaint dismissal may be appealed to the Chief Human Resources Officer for employees and students, or to the Customer Services Director for University Hospitals and Clinics when a complaint is filed by a patient, who will either agree or disagree with the initial decision. If this person disagrees with OEO/Title IX, the case will be remanded back to OEO/Title IX for investigation.
When an investigation begins, notice is provided to the person against whom the complaint is filed (the "Respondent") as well as the cognizant university vice president over the Respondent and any other university administrators who have a business need-to-know.
OEO/Title IX will interview the complainant and respondents separately, interview witnesses, gather documents, and other evidence.
Once the investigation is completed, OEO/Title IX will draft a report that is shared with the parties involved. The parties have ten (10) days to submit a response and/or additional information.
From the time a complaint is accepted for investigation to the time the report is drafted, OEO/Title IX will endeavor to complete the investigation within 60 calendar days.
In cases alleging Sexual Misconduct, OEO will issue a recommendation of whether or not a policy violation has occurred.  The determination about whether a policy was violated will be determined in a hearing (see Hearing).
In cases alleging other types of discrimination, OEO will issue a finding of whether or not a policy violation has occurred.
Findings and/or recommendations are shared with the Complainant, Respondent(s), the cognizant vice president over the Respondent(s), and may also be shared with Human Resources, Office for Faculty, and/or the Office of the Dean of Students.
CAUSE - this means that OEO has made a finding or a recommendation that a violation of the university's nondiscrimination policy HAS occurred.
INSUFFICIENT EVIDENCE - this means that OEO has made a finding or a recommendation that a policy of the university's nondiscrimination policy has NOT occurred.
In cases alleging sexual misconduct, the case automatically is scheduled for a hearing before a hearing committee.
In cases alleging other types of discrimination, if either party is dissatisfied with the outcome of the OEO/Title IX report, they may request a hearing within five days of the issuance of the OEO Report. If no hearing is requested, the process concludes and the OEO Report becomes the final decision of the University.
In discrimination cases that result in a finding of "insufficient evidence," the hearing Committee will first review the OEO/Title IX report and accompanying evidence to determine whether a hearing should be held.
The Committee is composed of a three-person panel, which includes a committee Chair.
Discrimination cases that result in a "cause" finding and all cases alleging sexual misconduct, do not involve an initial review and instead move directly to the hearing.
A hearing will be convened with notice given to both parties of the time, date, and location of the hearing.  Generally, hearings will be held using technology allowing all parties to simultaneously see and hear the party or the witness answering questions. Each party may be accompanied by an advisor of their choice, which may be an attorney, and also may also be accompanied by one support person of their choice.  If a party does not have an advisor, the University will provide an advisor for the limited purpose of conducting cross examination of the other party and any witnesses.  Each party will be permitted up to 45 minutes for opening statements, and extensions of time may be granted by the Chair of the Hearing Committee. Each party may also call witnesses and provide documents and other evidence.
Within 10 days of the hearing, the committee will issue its decision whether there is 'cause' or 'insufficient evidence' to show that a violation of policy has occurred.
If either party disagrees with the decision of the Hearing Committee, they may submit an appeal within five days.
If a timely appeal is not received, the decision becomes final.
If the decision of the Hearing Committee is appealed, the appeal goes to the cognizant Vice President or Designee, or in cases involving a faculty member, the appeal goes to the President or designee.  The decision is the final outcome by the university.
The University provides equitable resources and campus services to all parties involved. When an incident is brought to the attention of OEO/Title IX, Complainants (those who have experienced discrimination or sexual misconduct) and Respondents (those alleged to have engaged in discrimination or sexual misconduct) have access to a variety of resources and supportive measures aimed at protecting safety and minimizing disruption to academic pursuits. These are available regardless of whether or not a complaint is filed or of the resulting outcomes.
Health Sciences Education Building Fifth Floor, Suite 5515
Identifying information is not required to submit this form. However, this limits the ability of the office to respond.
The University of Utah is committed to maintaining a professional working and learning environment for all.
THE UNIVERSITY OF UTAH IS COMMITTED TO MAINTAINING A PROFESSIONAL WORKING AND LEARNING ENVIRONMENT FOR ALL.
The Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action, which also oversees Title IX, is entrusted with protecting this environment and accomplishes this by implementing and enforcing policies on nondiscrimination. The institution’s disciplinary process is designed to:
DETERMINE IF INSTITUTIONAL POLICY HAS BEEN VIOLATED
PROTECT INDIVIDUALS IN THE CAMPUS COMMUNITY FROM FURTHER
OEO/Title IX conducts investigations into allegations of discrimination or sexual misconduct.  When a violation of university policy has occurred, sanctions may be implemented by the appropriate sanctioning body.
Incidents reported to OEO/Title IX are generally not reported to the police (exceptions may occur when circumstances raise concerns of safety of others, including the broader campus community). Incidents reported to the University of Utah police are reported to OEO/Title IX.
Criminal and university administrative processes are independent of one another and may result in different outcomes and resolutions.
When an incident of discrimination or sexual misconduct occurs, it should be reported to OEO/Title IX. Once the office receives information about an incident, OEO/Title IX begins to review and determine how to respond to the reported incident:
When OEO/Title IX becomes aware of an incident of discrimination or sexual misconduct, the office immediately begins to explore the issue further to determine the appropriate steps to take based upon the information reported.
OEO/Title IX immediately connects individuals with information about supportive measures, resources and information about filing options, including how to file a formal complaint with OEO/AA and law enforcement, if applicable.
Upon gathering more information about the incident, OEO/Title IX will assess whether it has a duty to warn the campus community and/or take other actions, as necessary.
After an initial review, OEO/Title IX will determine whether the complaint states sufficient facts demonstrating that a violation of university policy may have occurred. If the complaint states facts that, if proven, would be a violation of the  discrimination policy, an  investigation will move forward. If not, the complaint will be dismissed.
A complaint dismissal may be appealed to the Chief Human Resources Officer for employees and students, or to the Customer Services Director for University Hospitals and Clinics when a complaint is filed by a patient, who will either agree or disagree with the initial decision. If this person disagrees with OEO/Title IX, the case will be remanded back to OEO/Title IX for investigation.
When an investigation begins, notice is provided to the person against whom the complaint is filed (the "Respondent") as well as the cognizant university vice president over the Respondent and any other university administrators who have a business need-to-know.
OEO/Title IX will interview the complainant and respondents separately, interview witnesses, gather documents, and other evidence.
Once the investigation is completed, OEO/Title IX will draft a report that is shared with the parties involved. The parties have ten (10) days to submit a response and/or additional information.
From the time a complaint is accepted for investigation to the time the report is drafted, OEO/Title IX will endeavor to complete the investigation within 60 calendar days.
In cases alleging Sexual Misconduct, OEO will issue a recommendation of whether or not a policy violation has occurred.  The determination about whether a policy was violated will be determined in a hearing (see Hearing).
In cases alleging other types of discrimination, OEO will issue a finding of whether or not a policy violation has occurred.
Findings and/or recommendations are shared with the Complainant, Respondent(s), the cognizant vice president over the Respondent(s), and may also be shared with Human Resources, Office for Faculty, and/or the Office of the Dean of Students.
CAUSE - this means that OEO has made a finding or a recommendation that a violation of the university's nondiscrimination policy HAS occurred.
INSUFFICIENT EVIDENCE - this means that OEO has made a finding or a recommendation that a policy of the university's nondiscrimination policy has NOT occurred.
In cases alleging sexual misconduct, the case automatically is scheduled for a hearing before a hearing committee.
In cases alleging other types of discrimination, if either party is dissatisfied with the outcome of the OEO/Title IX report, they may request a hearing within five days of the issuance of the OEO Report. If no hearing is requested, the process concludes and the OEO Report becomes the final decision of the University.
In discrimination cases that result in a finding of "insufficient evidence," the hearing Committee will first review the OEO/Title IX report and accompanying evidence to determine whether a hearing should be held.
The Committee is composed of a three-person panel, which includes a committee Chair.
Discrimination cases that result in a "cause" finding and all cases alleging sexual misconduct, do not involve an initial review and instead move directly to the hearing.
A hearing will be convened with notice given to both parties of the time, date, and location of the hearing.  Generally, hearings will be held using technology allowing all parties to simultaneously see and hear the party or the witness answering questions. Each party may be accompanied by an advisor of their choice, which may be an attorney, and also may also be accompanied by one support person of their choice.  If a party does not have an advisor, the University will provide an advisor for the limited purpose of conducting cross examination of the other party and any witnesses.  Each party will be permitted up to 45 minutes for opening statements, and extensions of time may be granted by the Chair of the Hearing Committee. Each party may also call witnesses and provide documents and other evidence.
Within 10 days of the hearing, the committee will issue its decision whether there is 'cause' or 'insufficient evidence' to show that a violation of policy has occurred.
If either party disagrees with the decision of the Hearing Committee, they may submit an appeal within five days.
If a timely appeal is not received, the decision becomes final.
If the decision of the Hearing Committee is appealed, the appeal goes to the cognizant Vice President or Designee, or in cases involving a faculty member, the appeal goes to the President or designee.  The decision is the final outcome by the university.
The University provides equitable resources and campus services to all parties involved. When an incident is brought to the attention of OEO/Title IX, Complainants (those who have experienced discrimination or sexual misconduct) and Respondents (those alleged to have engaged in discrimination or sexual misconduct) have access to a variety of resources and supportive measures aimed at protecting safety and minimizing disruption to academic pursuits. These are available regardless of whether or not a complaint is filed or of the resulting outcomes.
Health Sciences Education Building Fifth Floor, Suite 5515
Identifying information is not required to submit this form. However, this limits the ability of the office to respond.
Nondiscrimination Statement - The University of Utah
The University of Utah does not discriminate on the basis of race, ethnicity, color,
religion, national origin, sex, pregnancy, pregnancy-related conditions, age, disability,
sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, genetic information or protected
veteran’s status, in employment, treatment, admission, access to educational programs
and activities, or other University benefits or services.
The University does not discriminate on the basis of sex in the education program
or activity that it operates, as required by Title IX and 34 CFR part 106.  The requirement
not to discriminate in education programs or activities extends to admission and employment.
Inquiries about the application of Title IX and its regulations may be referred to
the Title IX Coordinator, to the Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights,
Additionally, the University endeavors to provide reasonable accommodations and to
ensure equal access to qualified persons with disabilities. Click here to request a reasonable accommodation.
Where discrimination is found to have occurred, the University will take reasonable
steps to investigate the matter, stop the harassment, prevent its recurrence and remedy
If you or someone you know has experienced discrimination, sexual misconduct including
sexual harassment, or disability discrimination, we encourage you to report it to
the University's designated and authorized Title IX/ADA/Section 504 Coordinator in
the Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action:
Sherrie Hayashi, DirectorTitle IX/ADA/Section 504 CoordinatorOffice of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)201 South Presidents Circle, Rm.135 Salt Lake City, UT, 84112801-581-8365 801-585-5746 (fax)oeo@utah.eduwww.oeo.utah.eduOnline reports may be submitted at oeo.utah.edu
To file a formal complaint of discrimination, sexual misconduct (including sexual
harassment or violence), or retaliation, under University of Utah Non-Discrimination
Policy, contact the OEO/AA.   A formal complaint may be filed with the OEO/AA in person,
A Formal Complaint of Sex or Gender-Based Harassment within the scope of Title IX
is timely if at the time of filing a Formal Complaint, the Complainant is participating
in or attempting to participate in a University Program.
A Formal Complaint alleging any other type of Sexual Misconduct, or other type of
Discrimination is timely if filed within 180 calendar days of the last alleged discriminatory
A Formal Complaint of Retaliation is timey filed if filed within 180 days of the last
A Formal Complaint not filed within the appropriate time period above will be dismissed
as untimely filed; however, at the Director's discretion and for good cause, the complaint
may be accepted as if filed within the appropriate time period.
University of UtahOffice of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)201 S. Presidents Circle, Room 135Salt Lake City, UT  84112Telephone: 801-581-8365Fax: 801-585-5746oeo@utah.eduwww.oeo.utah.eduOnline reports may be submitted at oeo.utah.edu
For specific information related to University Policy, please see:
regulations.utah.edu/general/1-012.phpregulations.utah.edu/general/1-011.php
EXTERNAL AGENCIES:  Filing a complaint with the University of Utah’s Title IX/504/ADA Coordinator (or
designee) does not prevent an individual from filing a complaint with an appropriate
regulatory agency. To file a complaint regarding discrimination, including sexual
harassment, or retaliation with a regulatory state or federal agency, please see the
agency information below.  For information about the time frames in which complaints
Education: Complaints regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title IX of the Education
Amendments of 1972, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Title II of the
Americans with Disabilities Act, Age Discrimination Act of 1975.
United States Department of EducationOffice for Civil Rights– Region VIIICesar E. Chavez Memorial Building1244 Speer Boulevard, Suite 310Denver, Colorado 80204-3582Telephone: 303-844-5695FAX: 303-844-4303
Online complaint portal: http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/docs/howto.htmlwww2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/index.html
Employment:State Agency:  Individual complaints regarding: Utah Anti-Discrimination Act of 1965,
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, Age Discrimination in Employment
Act of 1967, as amended, and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. Utah Anti-Discrimination and Labor Division (UALD)160 East 300 South, 3rd floorP.O. Box 146630Salt Lake City, Utah 84114-6630Telephone: 801-530-6801www.laborcommission.utah.gov
Federal Agencies:Complaints regarding: Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, The Pregnancy Discrimination
Act, Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, as amended (ADEA), Equal Pay Act
of 1963, Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act of 2008, Sections
501 and 505 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and Section 102 and 103 of the Civil
Rights Act of 1991, the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 (GINA) Equal Employment Opportunity CommissionPhoenix District Office3300 North Central Avenue, Suite 690Phoenix, AZ 85012Telephone: 1-800-669-4000TTY:  1-800-669-6820Fax: 602-640-5071www.eeoc.gov U.S. Department of LaborOffice of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP)Denver District Office1244 Speer Blvd, Suite 540Denver, CO 80204Phone 720-264-3200Fax:  720-264-3211https://www.dol.gov/ofccp/index.htm Executive Order 11246 (Equal Employment and Affirmative Action)Americans with Disability Act Amendments Act, of 2008Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 197338 USC 4212 – The Vietnam Era Veterans’ Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974Uniformed Service Employment and Re-employment Rights Act (USERRA)Online complaint portal:www.dol.gov/elaws/vets/userra/ee_disc.asp Veteran’s Employment and Training Service140 East 300 South, Room 209Salt Lake City, UT 84111Telephone: 801-526-0950jobs.utah.gov/jobseeker/veterans/employtrain.html
Housing (Residents of dorms and family student housing)State Agency:  Complaints regarding: Utah Fair Housing Act of 1993, as amended.
Utah Anti-Discrimination and Labor Division (UALD)160 East 300 South, 3rd floorSalt Lake City, Utah 84114-6630Telephone: 801-530-6801www.laborcommission.utah.gov Federal Agency:  U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”) Complaints
regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, Title VIII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1968 (Fair Housing Act), Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Action
of 1973, as amended, Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, Age
Discrimination Act of 1975, Title IX of the Education Amendments Act, and Architectural
Barriers Act of 1968. U.S. Department of Housing & Urban Development (HUD)1670 Broadway, 25th floorDenver, Colorado 80202-4801Telephone: (303)672-5440Fax: (303)672-5004Online complaint portal: https://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/topics/housing_discrimination Health care, human services, and health insurance plans (Patients and Participants):  Complaints regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, Title
II of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and the Community Service Assurance
provisions of the Hill-Burton Act U.S. Department of Health & Human ServicesOffice for Civil Rights, DHHS – Region VIII1961 Stout Street Room 08-148Denver, CO 80294Customer Response Center 1-800-368-1019TDD:  1-800-537-7697Email: Ocrmail@hhs.govOnline complaint portal: https://ocrportal.hhs.gov/ocr/smartscreen/main.jsfWebsite: www.hhs.gov/ocrCampus Accessibility Website: https://accessibility.utah.edu
201 Presidents Circle Salt Lake City, UT 84112 801.581.7200
Sexual Misconduct - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
University of Utah policy prohibits sex discrimination, which includes sexual misconduct.
Sexual Misconduct is the most egregious form of sex discrimination. Title IX of the
Education Amendments Act of 1972 is the comprehensive federal law that prohibits discrimination
on the basis of sex in any federally funded education program or activity.
Policies, procedures, and resources are in place to take immediate and appropriate
steps to remedy violations of University policy and the university will take steps
to end or eliminate the hostile environment, prevent its recurrence and to remedy
the effects, as appropriate under each individualï¿½s circumstances.
Complaints of sexual misconduct should be made directly to the Office of Equal Opportunity
Please see the Title IX Coordinator Outreach letter to learn about your specific rights to seek out Supportive Measures and options for
accountability through the OEO/AA process or through law enforcement.
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112Phone: 801-581-8365Fax: 801-585-5746
As defined by University Rule, R1-012: Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Misconduct
is a broad term used to encompass a range of behaviors including Sexual or Gender-Based
Harassment, Intimate Partner Violence, Sexual Exploitation, Stalking, Nonconsensual
Sexual Contact, and Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration. Sexual Misconduct also includes
the crimes of dating violence, domestic violence, sexual assault and stalking as defined
by state and federal law. Sexual Misconduct is a form of Sex Discrimination. The following
definitions of prohibited conduct apply to University policies.
As defined by University Rule, R1-012, Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Harassment
means unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical
conduct of a sexual nature or based on an individualï¿½s sex, sexual orientation, gender,
Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition
of an individualï¿½s employment, education, living environment, health care or participation
Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for
or a factor in decisions affecting that individualï¿½s employment, education, living
environment, or participation in a university program or activity; or
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of interfering with an individualï¿½s employment
or educational performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment
for that individualï¿½s employment, education, living environment, or participation
Consent means affirmative, unambiguous, and voluntary agreement. For a nonexhaustive
list of situations in which consent has not been given, see Utah Code Ann. 76-5-406.
means actual or threatened physical violence, intimidation, or other forms of physical
or sexual abuse that would cause a reasonable person to fear harm to self or others.
For this policy, ï¿½intimate relationshipï¿½ means marriage, domestic partnership, engagement,
casual or serious romantic involvement, and dating, whether in a current or former
relationship. Intimate Partner Violence can occur between persons of any sex, sexual
orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, and it can occur in any
type of intimate relationship including monogamous, non-committed, and relationships
involving more than two partners. Intimate Partner Violence can be a single act or
a pattern of behavior. Intimate Partner Violence is sometimes referred to as, and
includes behaviors that would be considered, dating violence, domestic violence, or
relationship abuse. Examples of Intimate Partner Violence include, but are not limited
to, situations in which the following behaviors are directed toward a partner in a
current or former intimate relationship: hitting, kicking, strangling, or other violence;
property damage; and threat of violence to oneï¿½s self, oneï¿½s partner, or the family
members, friends, pets, or personal property of the partner. Intimate Partner Violence
means any physical contact with another person of a sexual nature without that personï¿½s
Consent. The touching of a personï¿½s intimate parts (such as genitalia, groin, breast,
buttocks, mouth, or clothing covering same); touching a person with oneï¿½s own intimate
parts; or forcing a person to touch anotherï¿½s intimate parts would be violations of
this policy if they occur without Consent. Nonconsensual Sexual Contact is a form
means the sexual penetration of any bodily opening with any object or body part without
Consent.ï¿½This could be committed by force, threat, intimidation, or through exploitation of
anotherï¿½s mental or physical condition (such as lack of consciousness, incapacitation
due to drugs or alcohol, age, or disability) of which the Respondent was actually
aware or which a reasonable person in the Respondentï¿½s position should have been aware.
Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
means treating someone differently, i.e., disadvantaging the person, on the basis
of sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression when:
such conduct adversely affects a term or condition of an individualï¿½s employment,
education, living environment, or participation in a University program or activity;
a personï¿½s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity or expression is used
as the basis for or a factor in decisions affecting that individualï¿½s employment,
education, living environment, health care, or participation in a University program
means any physical sexual act perpetrated against a personï¿½s will or where a person
is incapable of giving consent (e.g., due to age or use of drugs or alcohol, or because
an intellectual or other disability prevents the person from having the capacity to
means engaging in a course of conduct directed at a specific person and based on thatï¿½s
personï¿½s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, that
would cause a reasonable person to fear for the personï¿½s safety or the safety of others
or suffer substantial emotional distress. Stalking is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
Discussion of issues or theories relating to sexuality or gender in an academic or
professional setting, when appropriate to subject matter, will be presumed not to
constitute sexual harassment even if it offends or embarrasses an individual unless
other factors are involved. Such factors include targeting the discussion to an individual
or carrying out the discussion in terms that are both patently unnecessary and gratuitously
Under university policy, most University employeesï¿½are required to report situations
involving sexual misconduct and discrimination to the Office of Equal Opportunity
Some situations may be very personal; we respect your privacy and will protect it
in accordance with University of Utah policy and FERPA. Although information about
the situation may be reported to the OEO/AA, you have the right to choose to whom
you speak, what you say, when you say it and what resources you use. If you prefer
to speak first with a confidential resource (confidential resources are not required
to report information to the OEO/AA, you may contact one of the groups below.
Information provided to OEO/AA is considered private information and will only be shared with other appropriate university personnel on
A collection of sites and areas containing additional information
Information about Sexual Assaultï¿½Awareness & Response Support
Office of Equal Opportunity,ï¿½ Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Sexual Misconduct - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
University of Utah policy prohibits sex discrimination, which includes sexual misconduct.
Sexual Misconduct is the most egregious form of sex discrimination. Title IX of the
Education Amendments Act of 1972 is the comprehensive federal law that prohibits discrimination
on the basis of sex in any federally funded education program or activity.
Policies, procedures, and resources are in place to take immediate and appropriate
steps to remedy violations of University policy and the university will take steps
to end or eliminate the hostile environment, prevent its recurrence and to remedy
the effects, as appropriate under each individualï¿½s circumstances.
Complaints of sexual misconduct should be made directly to the Office of Equal Opportunity
Please see the Title IX Coordinator Outreach letter to learn about your specific rights to seek out Supportive Measures and options for
accountability through the OEO/AA process or through law enforcement.
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112Phone: 801-581-8365Fax: 801-585-5746
As defined by University Rule, R1-012: Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Misconduct
is a broad term used to encompass a range of behaviors including Sexual or Gender-Based
Harassment, Intimate Partner Violence, Sexual Exploitation, Stalking, Nonconsensual
Sexual Contact, and Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration. Sexual Misconduct also includes
the crimes of dating violence, domestic violence, sexual assault and stalking as defined
by state and federal law. Sexual Misconduct is a form of Sex Discrimination. The following
definitions of prohibited conduct apply to University policies.
As defined by University Rule, R1-012, Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Harassment
means unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical
conduct of a sexual nature or based on an individualï¿½s sex, sexual orientation, gender,
Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition
of an individualï¿½s employment, education, living environment, health care or participation
Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for
or a factor in decisions affecting that individualï¿½s employment, education, living
environment, or participation in a university program or activity; or
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of interfering with an individualï¿½s employment
or educational performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment
for that individualï¿½s employment, education, living environment, or participation
Consent means affirmative, unambiguous, and voluntary agreement. For a nonexhaustive
list of situations in which consent has not been given, see Utah Code Ann. 76-5-406.
means actual or threatened physical violence, intimidation, or other forms of physical
or sexual abuse that would cause a reasonable person to fear harm to self or others.
For this policy, ï¿½intimate relationshipï¿½ means marriage, domestic partnership, engagement,
casual or serious romantic involvement, and dating, whether in a current or former
relationship. Intimate Partner Violence can occur between persons of any sex, sexual
orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, and it can occur in any
type of intimate relationship including monogamous, non-committed, and relationships
involving more than two partners. Intimate Partner Violence can be a single act or
a pattern of behavior. Intimate Partner Violence is sometimes referred to as, and
includes behaviors that would be considered, dating violence, domestic violence, or
relationship abuse. Examples of Intimate Partner Violence include, but are not limited
to, situations in which the following behaviors are directed toward a partner in a
current or former intimate relationship: hitting, kicking, strangling, or other violence;
property damage; and threat of violence to oneï¿½s self, oneï¿½s partner, or the family
members, friends, pets, or personal property of the partner. Intimate Partner Violence
means any physical contact with another person of a sexual nature without that personï¿½s
Consent. The touching of a personï¿½s intimate parts (such as genitalia, groin, breast,
buttocks, mouth, or clothing covering same); touching a person with oneï¿½s own intimate
parts; or forcing a person to touch anotherï¿½s intimate parts would be violations of
this policy if they occur without Consent. Nonconsensual Sexual Contact is a form
means the sexual penetration of any bodily opening with any object or body part without
Consent.ï¿½This could be committed by force, threat, intimidation, or through exploitation of
anotherï¿½s mental or physical condition (such as lack of consciousness, incapacitation
due to drugs or alcohol, age, or disability) of which the Respondent was actually
aware or which a reasonable person in the Respondentï¿½s position should have been aware.
Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
means treating someone differently, i.e., disadvantaging the person, on the basis
of sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression when:
such conduct adversely affects a term or condition of an individualï¿½s employment,
education, living environment, or participation in a University program or activity;
a personï¿½s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity or expression is used
as the basis for or a factor in decisions affecting that individualï¿½s employment,
education, living environment, health care, or participation in a University program
means any physical sexual act perpetrated against a personï¿½s will or where a person
is incapable of giving consent (e.g., due to age or use of drugs or alcohol, or because
an intellectual or other disability prevents the person from having the capacity to
means engaging in a course of conduct directed at a specific person and based on thatï¿½s
personï¿½s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, that
would cause a reasonable person to fear for the personï¿½s safety or the safety of others
or suffer substantial emotional distress. Stalking is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
Discussion of issues or theories relating to sexuality or gender in an academic or
professional setting, when appropriate to subject matter, will be presumed not to
constitute sexual harassment even if it offends or embarrasses an individual unless
other factors are involved. Such factors include targeting the discussion to an individual
or carrying out the discussion in terms that are both patently unnecessary and gratuitously
Under university policy, most University employeesï¿½are required to report situations
involving sexual misconduct and discrimination to the Office of Equal Opportunity
Some situations may be very personal; we respect your privacy and will protect it
in accordance with University of Utah policy and FERPA. Although information about
the situation may be reported to the OEO/AA, you have the right to choose to whom
you speak, what you say, when you say it and what resources you use. If you prefer
to speak first with a confidential resource (confidential resources are not required
to report information to the OEO/AA, you may contact one of the groups below.
Information provided to OEO/AA is considered private information and will only be shared with other appropriate university personnel on
A collection of sites and areas containing additional information
Information about Sexual Assaultï¿½Awareness & Response Support
Office of Equal Opportunity,ï¿½ Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
The Office of Equal Opportunity And Affirmative Action (OEO/AA) is dedicated to providing
a fair and equitable environment forï¿½all to pursue their academic and professional
The Office of Equal Opportunity/Title IX (OEO/AA) office is open for business; however,
due to theï¿½universityï¿½s commitment to slow the spread of the Coronavirus and contribute
to the health and well-being of our community, OEO/AA staff are telecommuting until
Our website contains a wealth of information about the policies and processes for
addressing discrimination, harassment, and sexual misconduct.ï¿½ In addition, you may
Thank you for your patience, support, and understanding during this evolving situation.
OEO/AA provides disability, religious, and pregnancy accommodation forms.
Office of Equal Opportunity,ï¿½ Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Sexual Misconduct - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
University of Utah policy prohibits sex discrimination, which includes sexual misconduct.
Sexual Misconduct is the most egregious form of sex discrimination. Title IX of the
Education Amendments Act of 1972 is the comprehensive federal law that prohibits discrimination
on the basis of sex in any federally funded education program or activity.
Policies, procedures, and resources are in place to take immediate and appropriate
steps to remedy violations of University policy and the university will take steps
to end or eliminate the hostile environment, prevent its recurrence and to remedy
the effects, as appropriate under each individualï¿½s circumstances.
Complaints of sexual misconduct should be made directly to the Office of Equal Opportunity
Please see the Title IX Coordinator Outreach letter to learn about your specific rights to seek out Supportive Measures and options for
accountability through the OEO/AA process or through law enforcement.
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112Phone: 801-581-8365Fax: 801-585-5746
As defined by University Rule, R1-012: Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Misconduct
is a broad term used to encompass a range of behaviors including Sexual or Gender-Based
Harassment, Intimate Partner Violence, Sexual Exploitation, Stalking, Nonconsensual
Sexual Contact, and Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration. Sexual Misconduct also includes
the crimes of dating violence, domestic violence, sexual assault and stalking as defined
by state and federal law. Sexual Misconduct is a form of Sex Discrimination. The following
definitions of prohibited conduct apply to University policies.
As defined by University Rule, R1-012, Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Harassment
means unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical
conduct of a sexual nature or based on an individualï¿½s sex, sexual orientation, gender,
Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition
of an individualï¿½s employment, education, living environment, health care or participation
Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for
or a factor in decisions affecting that individualï¿½s employment, education, living
environment, or participation in a university program or activity; or
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of interfering with an individualï¿½s employment
or educational performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment
for that individualï¿½s employment, education, living environment, or participation
Consent means affirmative, unambiguous, and voluntary agreement. For a nonexhaustive
list of situations in which consent has not been given, see Utah Code Ann. 76-5-406.
means actual or threatened physical violence, intimidation, or other forms of physical
or sexual abuse that would cause a reasonable person to fear harm to self or others.
For this policy, ï¿½intimate relationshipï¿½ means marriage, domestic partnership, engagement,
casual or serious romantic involvement, and dating, whether in a current or former
relationship. Intimate Partner Violence can occur between persons of any sex, sexual
orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, and it can occur in any
type of intimate relationship including monogamous, non-committed, and relationships
involving more than two partners. Intimate Partner Violence can be a single act or
a pattern of behavior. Intimate Partner Violence is sometimes referred to as, and
includes behaviors that would be considered, dating violence, domestic violence, or
relationship abuse. Examples of Intimate Partner Violence include, but are not limited
to, situations in which the following behaviors are directed toward a partner in a
current or former intimate relationship: hitting, kicking, strangling, or other violence;
property damage; and threat of violence to oneï¿½s self, oneï¿½s partner, or the family
members, friends, pets, or personal property of the partner. Intimate Partner Violence
means any physical contact with another person of a sexual nature without that personï¿½s
Consent. The touching of a personï¿½s intimate parts (such as genitalia, groin, breast,
buttocks, mouth, or clothing covering same); touching a person with oneï¿½s own intimate
parts; or forcing a person to touch anotherï¿½s intimate parts would be violations of
this policy if they occur without Consent. Nonconsensual Sexual Contact is a form
means the sexual penetration of any bodily opening with any object or body part without
Consent.ï¿½This could be committed by force, threat, intimidation, or through exploitation of
anotherï¿½s mental or physical condition (such as lack of consciousness, incapacitation
due to drugs or alcohol, age, or disability) of which the Respondent was actually
aware or which a reasonable person in the Respondentï¿½s position should have been aware.
Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
means treating someone differently, i.e., disadvantaging the person, on the basis
of sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression when:
such conduct adversely affects a term or condition of an individualï¿½s employment,
education, living environment, or participation in a University program or activity;
a personï¿½s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity or expression is used
as the basis for or a factor in decisions affecting that individualï¿½s employment,
education, living environment, health care, or participation in a University program
means any physical sexual act perpetrated against a personï¿½s will or where a person
is incapable of giving consent (e.g., due to age or use of drugs or alcohol, or because
an intellectual or other disability prevents the person from having the capacity to
means engaging in a course of conduct directed at a specific person and based on thatï¿½s
personï¿½s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, that
would cause a reasonable person to fear for the personï¿½s safety or the safety of others
or suffer substantial emotional distress. Stalking is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
Discussion of issues or theories relating to sexuality or gender in an academic or
professional setting, when appropriate to subject matter, will be presumed not to
constitute sexual harassment even if it offends or embarrasses an individual unless
other factors are involved. Such factors include targeting the discussion to an individual
or carrying out the discussion in terms that are both patently unnecessary and gratuitously
Under university policy, most University employeesï¿½are required to report situations
involving sexual misconduct and discrimination to the Office of Equal Opportunity
Some situations may be very personal; we respect your privacy and will protect it
in accordance with University of Utah policy and FERPA. Although information about
the situation may be reported to the OEO/AA, you have the right to choose to whom
you speak, what you say, when you say it and what resources you use. If you prefer
to speak first with a confidential resource (confidential resources are not required
to report information to the OEO/AA, you may contact one of the groups below.
Information provided to OEO/AA is considered private information and will only be shared with other appropriate university personnel on
A collection of sites and areas containing additional information
Information about Sexual Assaultï¿½Awareness & Response Support
Office of Equal Opportunity,ï¿½ Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Prohibited Discrimination - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Discrimination is partiality or bias in the treatment of a person or group that is
unfair or violates law or policy. Treating someone differently based on a protected classï¿½violates University policy. A protected class is a group of people protected against
discrimination by University policy or by state and federal law.
iconï¿½Colorï¿½iconï¿½Raceiconï¿½Ethnicityiconï¿½National Originiconï¿½Ageiconï¿½Religioniconï¿½Disabilityiconï¿½Veteran Statusiconï¿½Pregnancyï¿½iconï¿½Sexiconï¿½Sexual Orientationiconï¿½Gender Identityiconï¿½Gender Expressioniconï¿½Genetic Information
Not all discrimination violates law or policy. One can be subject to unfair treatment
that does not violate University policy or state or federal law. An example would
be being treated unfairly because someone doesnï¿½t like you or because of your political
The Universityï¿½s nondiscrimination policy applies broadly to students, employees,
and visitors. Hostile environment is a commonly used term but from a legal and policy
perspective, a hostile environment is a form of discriminatory harassment.
Harassment means unwelcome or offensive conduct which has the purpose or effect of
interfering with an individualsï¿½ work or academic environment or creating an intimidating
hostile, offensive or otherwise working or learning environment based upon a personï¿½s
race, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, religion, sexual orientation,
gender identity, gender expression, or protected veteranï¿½s status. The Universityï¿½s
Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA) is responsible for the
Many people have heard the term ï¿½hostile environmentï¿½ in the context of sexual harassment
but a ï¿½hostile environmentï¿½ can also include harassment because of race, color, national
origin, age, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression and
protected veteranï¿½s status. For harassment not related to discrimination, contact
What constitutes a hostile environment? What are the range of scenarios that people
A hostile environment can be created in many ways. Verbal comments, text messages,
pictures, graphics, graffiti and physical conduct can create a hostile environment.
This might look like racial slurs, comments about a personï¿½s national origin, or behavior
or words that mock, demean, put down, disparage, threaten or ridicule others based
upon race, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, religion, sexual orientation,
An isolated statement, even if rude and offensive, generally does not constitute a
hostile environment. Occasional insensitive and off-hand comments, even if inappropriate
or unprofessional, will generally not create a hostile environment. The focus is whether
the behavior, as a whole, affecting a personï¿½s education or working environment. In order to interfere with a personï¿½s work or educational environment, generally
the conduct must be severe, recurring and pervasive so that it interferes with your
Although an occasional comment may not constitute a violation of the Universityï¿½s
nondiscrimination policy, other provisions of University policy governing student
and employee conduct may apply. It is important to mention that the University, in
terms of student, visitor, and employee conduct, has an interest in preventing discrimination
and harassment. For example, if a department has an employee who tells an inappropriate
joke then other employees begin to participate in similar types of comments, believing
that such behavior is condoned, the workplace can then develop into a hostile environment
If someone feels like they are experiencing a hostile environment, what options are
The first step is to tell the individual that their comments are unwelcome and unwanted.
Sometimes this may be difficult but once you have made it clear that their comments
are not welcome, the individual has clearly been notified that you find their behavior
unwelcome and offensive. Once the individual clearly understands the behavior isnï¿½t
welcome yet continues to engage in similar behavior, disciplinary action may be appropriate.
There are many options on the University campus that can assist you in addressing
the unwanted and unwelcome behavior. The Office of the Dean of Students, Human Resources, and the Office of Equal Opportunity are all avenues that can assist you in addressing
How are issues like these handled to protect the person dealing with hostility while
The Office of Equal Opportunity is neutral and impartial whose purpose in an investigation
is to determine the facts. Both parties are provided an opportunity to provide their
side of the story. Obtaining both the perspective of the person dealing with the hostility
as well as the person alleged to have engaged in the behavior is important in terms
of treating both parties fairly. Although both parties are given an opportunity to
provide their side of the story, it is important to remember that it doesnï¿½t matter
whether the behavior was intended to hurt the other individual. An investigation by
the Office of Equal Opportunity would look at whether a reasonable person would take
University policy prohibits retaliation against an individual for having made a complaint,
testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, hearing, or
proceeding under the Universityï¿½s nondiscrimination policies or for interfering with
the rights of individuals under the Universityï¿½s nondiscrimination policies.
demoting, disciplining, or harassing an employee because the employee files or reports
interfering with witnesses or others who may be interviewed as part of an investigation
giving a lower grade because a student does not accede to sexual advances
If you believe you have experienced discriminatory conduct, including sexual misconduct,
Office of Equal Opportunity,ï¿½ Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Title IX Training Materials - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Consistent with Department of Education Title IX regulatory requirements, the following
training materials are being made available for inspection.ï¿½ The materials below have
been used to train Title IX Coordinators, investigators, decision-makers, and any
person who facilitates an informal resolution process for training completed on or
after August 14, 2020. ï¿½In some instances the Office of Equal Opportunity isï¿½providing
material from training prior to August 14, 2020, where the material is available and
the holder of the copyright provided permission to post the material forï¿½inspection.
Materials presented may copyrighted by author(s). Materials are not to be downloaded,
shared, or used for purposes other than review under than purposed listed in Section
106.45(b)(1)(iii) & ï¿½ 106.45(b)(10)(i)(D) of Title IX, Education Amendments Act.
NASPA:ï¿½ Track 2:ï¿½ Title IX Decision-makers and Student Conduct Administrators
NAPSA: Facilitating Fair and Effective Informal Resolution Processes
Title IX Coordinator Training: Pregnancy or Pregnancy-Related Conditions
Office of Equal Opportunity,ï¿½ Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Sexual Misconduct - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
University of Utah policy prohibits sex discrimination, which includes sexual misconduct.
Sexual Misconduct is the most egregious form of sex discrimination. Title IX of the
Education Amendments Act of 1972 is the comprehensive federal law that prohibits discrimination
on the basis of sex in any federally funded education program or activity.
Policies, procedures, and resources are in place to take immediate and appropriate
steps to remedy violations of University policy and the university will take steps
to end or eliminate the hostile environment, prevent its recurrence and to remedy
the effects, as appropriate under each individualï¿½s circumstances.
Complaints of sexual misconduct should be made directly to the Office of Equal Opportunity
Please see the Title IX Coordinator Outreach letter to learn about your specific rights to seek out Supportive Measures and options for
accountability through the OEO/AA process or through law enforcement.
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112Phone: 801-581-8365Fax: 801-585-5746
As defined by University Rule, R1-012: Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Misconduct
is a broad term used to encompass a range of behaviors including Sexual or Gender-Based
Harassment, Intimate Partner Violence, Sexual Exploitation, Stalking, Nonconsensual
Sexual Contact, and Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration. Sexual Misconduct also includes
the crimes of dating violence, domestic violence, sexual assault and stalking as defined
by state and federal law. Sexual Misconduct is a form of Sex Discrimination. The following
definitions of prohibited conduct apply to University policies.
As defined by University Rule, R1-012, Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Harassment
means unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical
conduct of a sexual nature or based on an individualï¿½s sex, sexual orientation, gender,
Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition
of an individualï¿½s employment, education, living environment, health care or participation
Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for
or a factor in decisions affecting that individualï¿½s employment, education, living
environment, or participation in a university program or activity; or
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of interfering with an individualï¿½s employment
or educational performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment
for that individualï¿½s employment, education, living environment, or participation
Consent means affirmative, unambiguous, and voluntary agreement. For a nonexhaustive
list of situations in which consent has not been given, see Utah Code Ann. 76-5-406.
means actual or threatened physical violence, intimidation, or other forms of physical
or sexual abuse that would cause a reasonable person to fear harm to self or others.
For this policy, ï¿½intimate relationshipï¿½ means marriage, domestic partnership, engagement,
casual or serious romantic involvement, and dating, whether in a current or former
relationship. Intimate Partner Violence can occur between persons of any sex, sexual
orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, and it can occur in any
type of intimate relationship including monogamous, non-committed, and relationships
involving more than two partners. Intimate Partner Violence can be a single act or
a pattern of behavior. Intimate Partner Violence is sometimes referred to as, and
includes behaviors that would be considered, dating violence, domestic violence, or
relationship abuse. Examples of Intimate Partner Violence include, but are not limited
to, situations in which the following behaviors are directed toward a partner in a
current or former intimate relationship: hitting, kicking, strangling, or other violence;
property damage; and threat of violence to oneï¿½s self, oneï¿½s partner, or the family
members, friends, pets, or personal property of the partner. Intimate Partner Violence
means any physical contact with another person of a sexual nature without that personï¿½s
Consent. The touching of a personï¿½s intimate parts (such as genitalia, groin, breast,
buttocks, mouth, or clothing covering same); touching a person with oneï¿½s own intimate
parts; or forcing a person to touch anotherï¿½s intimate parts would be violations of
this policy if they occur without Consent. Nonconsensual Sexual Contact is a form
means the sexual penetration of any bodily opening with any object or body part without
Consent.ï¿½This could be committed by force, threat, intimidation, or through exploitation of
anotherï¿½s mental or physical condition (such as lack of consciousness, incapacitation
due to drugs or alcohol, age, or disability) of which the Respondent was actually
aware or which a reasonable person in the Respondentï¿½s position should have been aware.
Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
means treating someone differently, i.e., disadvantaging the person, on the basis
of sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression when:
such conduct adversely affects a term or condition of an individualï¿½s employment,
education, living environment, or participation in a University program or activity;
a personï¿½s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity or expression is used
as the basis for or a factor in decisions affecting that individualï¿½s employment,
education, living environment, health care, or participation in a University program
means any physical sexual act perpetrated against a personï¿½s will or where a person
is incapable of giving consent (e.g., due to age or use of drugs or alcohol, or because
an intellectual or other disability prevents the person from having the capacity to
means engaging in a course of conduct directed at a specific person and based on thatï¿½s
personï¿½s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, that
would cause a reasonable person to fear for the personï¿½s safety or the safety of others
or suffer substantial emotional distress. Stalking is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
Discussion of issues or theories relating to sexuality or gender in an academic or
professional setting, when appropriate to subject matter, will be presumed not to
constitute sexual harassment even if it offends or embarrasses an individual unless
other factors are involved. Such factors include targeting the discussion to an individual
or carrying out the discussion in terms that are both patently unnecessary and gratuitously
Under university policy, most University employeesï¿½are required to report situations
involving sexual misconduct and discrimination to the Office of Equal Opportunity
Some situations may be very personal; we respect your privacy and will protect it
in accordance with University of Utah policy and FERPA. Although information about
the situation may be reported to the OEO/AA, you have the right to choose to whom
you speak, what you say, when you say it and what resources you use. If you prefer
to speak first with a confidential resource (confidential resources are not required
to report information to the OEO/AA, you may contact one of the groups below.
Information provided to OEO/AA is considered private information and will only be shared with other appropriate university personnel on
A collection of sites and areas containing additional information
Information about Sexual Assaultï¿½Awareness & Response Support
Office of Equal Opportunity,ï¿½ Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Prohibited Discrimination - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Discrimination is partiality or bias in the treatment of a person or group that is
unfair or violates law or policy. Treating someone differently based on a protected classï¿½violates University policy. A protected class is a group of people protected against
discrimination by University policy or by state and federal law.
iconï¿½Colorï¿½iconï¿½Raceiconï¿½Ethnicityiconï¿½National Originiconï¿½Ageiconï¿½Religioniconï¿½Disabilityiconï¿½Veteran Statusiconï¿½Pregnancyï¿½iconï¿½Sexiconï¿½Sexual Orientationiconï¿½Gender Identityiconï¿½Gender Expressioniconï¿½Genetic Information
Not all discrimination violates law or policy. One can be subject to unfair treatment
that does not violate University policy or state or federal law. An example would
be being treated unfairly because someone doesnï¿½t like you or because of your political
The Universityï¿½s nondiscrimination policy applies broadly to students, employees,
and visitors. Hostile environment is a commonly used term but from a legal and policy
perspective, a hostile environment is a form of discriminatory harassment.
Harassment means unwelcome or offensive conduct which has the purpose or effect of
interfering with an individualsï¿½ work or academic environment or creating an intimidating
hostile, offensive or otherwise working or learning environment based upon a personï¿½s
race, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, religion, sexual orientation,
gender identity, gender expression, or protected veteranï¿½s status. The Universityï¿½s
Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA) is responsible for the
Many people have heard the term ï¿½hostile environmentï¿½ in the context of sexual harassment
but a ï¿½hostile environmentï¿½ can also include harassment because of race, color, national
origin, age, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression and
protected veteranï¿½s status. For harassment not related to discrimination, contact
What constitutes a hostile environment? What are the range of scenarios that people
A hostile environment can be created in many ways. Verbal comments, text messages,
pictures, graphics, graffiti and physical conduct can create a hostile environment.
This might look like racial slurs, comments about a personï¿½s national origin, or behavior
or words that mock, demean, put down, disparage, threaten or ridicule others based
upon race, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, religion, sexual orientation,
An isolated statement, even if rude and offensive, generally does not constitute a
hostile environment. Occasional insensitive and off-hand comments, even if inappropriate
or unprofessional, will generally not create a hostile environment. The focus is whether
the behavior, as a whole, affecting a personï¿½s education or working environment. In order to interfere with a personï¿½s work or educational environment, generally
the conduct must be severe, recurring and pervasive so that it interferes with your
Although an occasional comment may not constitute a violation of the Universityï¿½s
nondiscrimination policy, other provisions of University policy governing student
and employee conduct may apply. It is important to mention that the University, in
terms of student, visitor, and employee conduct, has an interest in preventing discrimination
and harassment. For example, if a department has an employee who tells an inappropriate
joke then other employees begin to participate in similar types of comments, believing
that such behavior is condoned, the workplace can then develop into a hostile environment
If someone feels like they are experiencing a hostile environment, what options are
The first step is to tell the individual that their comments are unwelcome and unwanted.
Sometimes this may be difficult but once you have made it clear that their comments
are not welcome, the individual has clearly been notified that you find their behavior
unwelcome and offensive. Once the individual clearly understands the behavior isnï¿½t
welcome yet continues to engage in similar behavior, disciplinary action may be appropriate.
There are many options on the University campus that can assist you in addressing
the unwanted and unwelcome behavior. The Office of the Dean of Students, Human Resources, and the Office of Equal Opportunity are all avenues that can assist you in addressing
How are issues like these handled to protect the person dealing with hostility while
The Office of Equal Opportunity is neutral and impartial whose purpose in an investigation
is to determine the facts. Both parties are provided an opportunity to provide their
side of the story. Obtaining both the perspective of the person dealing with the hostility
as well as the person alleged to have engaged in the behavior is important in terms
of treating both parties fairly. Although both parties are given an opportunity to
provide their side of the story, it is important to remember that it doesnï¿½t matter
whether the behavior was intended to hurt the other individual. An investigation by
the Office of Equal Opportunity would look at whether a reasonable person would take
University policy prohibits retaliation against an individual for having made a complaint,
testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, hearing, or
proceeding under the Universityï¿½s nondiscrimination policies or for interfering with
the rights of individuals under the Universityï¿½s nondiscrimination policies.
demoting, disciplining, or harassing an employee because the employee files or reports
interfering with witnesses or others who may be interviewed as part of an investigation
giving a lower grade because a student does not accede to sexual advances
If you believe you have experienced discriminatory conduct, including sexual misconduct,
Office of Equal Opportunity,ï¿½ Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Title IX Training Materials - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Consistent with Department of Education Title IX regulatory requirements, the following
training materials are being made available for inspection.ï¿½ The materials below have
been used to train Title IX Coordinators, investigators, decision-makers, and any
person who facilitates an informal resolution process for training completed on or
after August 14, 2020. ï¿½In some instances the Office of Equal Opportunity isï¿½providing
material from training prior to August 14, 2020, where the material is available and
the holder of the copyright provided permission to post the material forï¿½inspection.
Materials presented may copyrighted by author(s). Materials are not to be downloaded,
shared, or used for purposes other than review under than purposed listed in Section
106.45(b)(1)(iii) & ï¿½ 106.45(b)(10)(i)(D) of Title IX, Education Amendments Act.
NASPA:ï¿½ Track 2:ï¿½ Title IX Decision-makers and Student Conduct Administrators
NAPSA: Facilitating Fair and Effective Informal Resolution Processes
Title IX Coordinator Training: Pregnancy or Pregnancy-Related Conditions
Office of Equal Opportunity,ï¿½ Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Sexual Misconduct - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
University of Utah policy prohibits sex discrimination, which includes sexual misconduct.
Sexual Misconduct is the most egregious form of sex discrimination. Title IX of the
Education Amendments Act of 1972 is the comprehensive federal law that prohibits discrimination
on the basis of sex in any federally funded education program or activity.
Policies, procedures, and resources are in place to take immediate and appropriate
steps to remedy violations of University policy and the university will take steps
to end or eliminate the hostile environment, prevent its recurrence and to remedy
the effects, as appropriate under each individualï¿½s circumstances.
Complaints of sexual misconduct should be made directly to the Office of Equal Opportunity
Please see the Title IX Coordinator Outreach letter to learn about your specific rights to seek out Supportive Measures and options for
accountability through the OEO/AA process or through law enforcement.
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112Phone: 801-581-8365Fax: 801-585-5746
As defined by University Rule, R1-012: Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Misconduct
is a broad term used to encompass a range of behaviors including Sexual or Gender-Based
Harassment, Intimate Partner Violence, Sexual Exploitation, Stalking, Nonconsensual
Sexual Contact, and Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration. Sexual Misconduct also includes
the crimes of dating violence, domestic violence, sexual assault and stalking as defined
by state and federal law. Sexual Misconduct is a form of Sex Discrimination. The following
definitions of prohibited conduct apply to University policies.
As defined by University Rule, R1-012, Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Harassment
means unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical
conduct of a sexual nature or based on an individualï¿½s sex, sexual orientation, gender,
Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition
of an individualï¿½s employment, education, living environment, health care or participation
Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for
or a factor in decisions affecting that individualï¿½s employment, education, living
environment, or participation in a university program or activity; or
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of interfering with an individualï¿½s employment
or educational performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment
for that individualï¿½s employment, education, living environment, or participation
Consent means affirmative, unambiguous, and voluntary agreement. For a nonexhaustive
list of situations in which consent has not been given, see Utah Code Ann. 76-5-406.
means actual or threatened physical violence, intimidation, or other forms of physical
or sexual abuse that would cause a reasonable person to fear harm to self or others.
For this policy, ï¿½intimate relationshipï¿½ means marriage, domestic partnership, engagement,
casual or serious romantic involvement, and dating, whether in a current or former
relationship. Intimate Partner Violence can occur between persons of any sex, sexual
orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, and it can occur in any
type of intimate relationship including monogamous, non-committed, and relationships
involving more than two partners. Intimate Partner Violence can be a single act or
a pattern of behavior. Intimate Partner Violence is sometimes referred to as, and
includes behaviors that would be considered, dating violence, domestic violence, or
relationship abuse. Examples of Intimate Partner Violence include, but are not limited
to, situations in which the following behaviors are directed toward a partner in a
current or former intimate relationship: hitting, kicking, strangling, or other violence;
property damage; and threat of violence to oneï¿½s self, oneï¿½s partner, or the family
members, friends, pets, or personal property of the partner. Intimate Partner Violence
means any physical contact with another person of a sexual nature without that personï¿½s
Consent. The touching of a personï¿½s intimate parts (such as genitalia, groin, breast,
buttocks, mouth, or clothing covering same); touching a person with oneï¿½s own intimate
parts; or forcing a person to touch anotherï¿½s intimate parts would be violations of
this policy if they occur without Consent. Nonconsensual Sexual Contact is a form
means the sexual penetration of any bodily opening with any object or body part without
Consent.ï¿½This could be committed by force, threat, intimidation, or through exploitation of
anotherï¿½s mental or physical condition (such as lack of consciousness, incapacitation
due to drugs or alcohol, age, or disability) of which the Respondent was actually
aware or which a reasonable person in the Respondentï¿½s position should have been aware.
Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
means treating someone differently, i.e., disadvantaging the person, on the basis
of sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression when:
such conduct adversely affects a term or condition of an individualï¿½s employment,
education, living environment, or participation in a University program or activity;
a personï¿½s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity or expression is used
as the basis for or a factor in decisions affecting that individualï¿½s employment,
education, living environment, health care, or participation in a University program
means any physical sexual act perpetrated against a personï¿½s will or where a person
is incapable of giving consent (e.g., due to age or use of drugs or alcohol, or because
an intellectual or other disability prevents the person from having the capacity to
means engaging in a course of conduct directed at a specific person and based on thatï¿½s
personï¿½s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, that
would cause a reasonable person to fear for the personï¿½s safety or the safety of others
or suffer substantial emotional distress. Stalking is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
Discussion of issues or theories relating to sexuality or gender in an academic or
professional setting, when appropriate to subject matter, will be presumed not to
constitute sexual harassment even if it offends or embarrasses an individual unless
other factors are involved. Such factors include targeting the discussion to an individual
or carrying out the discussion in terms that are both patently unnecessary and gratuitously
Under university policy, most University employeesï¿½are required to report situations
involving sexual misconduct and discrimination to the Office of Equal Opportunity
Some situations may be very personal; we respect your privacy and will protect it
in accordance with University of Utah policy and FERPA. Although information about
the situation may be reported to the OEO/AA, you have the right to choose to whom
you speak, what you say, when you say it and what resources you use. If you prefer
to speak first with a confidential resource (confidential resources are not required
to report information to the OEO/AA, you may contact one of the groups below.
Information provided to OEO/AA is considered private information and will only be shared with other appropriate university personnel on
A collection of sites and areas containing additional information
Information about Sexual Assaultï¿½Awareness & Response Support
Office of Equal Opportunity,ï¿½ Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Prohibited Discrimination - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Discrimination is partiality or bias in the treatment of a person or group that is
unfair or violates law or policy. Treating someone differently based on a protected classï¿½violates University policy. A protected class is a group of people protected against
discrimination by University policy or by state and federal law.
iconï¿½Colorï¿½iconï¿½Raceiconï¿½Ethnicityiconï¿½National Originiconï¿½Ageiconï¿½Religioniconï¿½Disabilityiconï¿½Veteran Statusiconï¿½Pregnancyï¿½iconï¿½Sexiconï¿½Sexual Orientationiconï¿½Gender Identityiconï¿½Gender Expressioniconï¿½Genetic Information
Not all discrimination violates law or policy. One can be subject to unfair treatment
that does not violate University policy or state or federal law. An example would
be being treated unfairly because someone doesnï¿½t like you or because of your political
The Universityï¿½s nondiscrimination policy applies broadly to students, employees,
and visitors. Hostile environment is a commonly used term but from a legal and policy
perspective, a hostile environment is a form of discriminatory harassment.
Harassment means unwelcome or offensive conduct which has the purpose or effect of
interfering with an individualsï¿½ work or academic environment or creating an intimidating
hostile, offensive or otherwise working or learning environment based upon a personï¿½s
race, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, religion, sexual orientation,
gender identity, gender expression, or protected veteranï¿½s status. The Universityï¿½s
Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA) is responsible for the
Many people have heard the term ï¿½hostile environmentï¿½ in the context of sexual harassment
but a ï¿½hostile environmentï¿½ can also include harassment because of race, color, national
origin, age, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression and
protected veteranï¿½s status. For harassment not related to discrimination, contact
What constitutes a hostile environment? What are the range of scenarios that people
A hostile environment can be created in many ways. Verbal comments, text messages,
pictures, graphics, graffiti and physical conduct can create a hostile environment.
This might look like racial slurs, comments about a personï¿½s national origin, or behavior
or words that mock, demean, put down, disparage, threaten or ridicule others based
upon race, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, religion, sexual orientation,
An isolated statement, even if rude and offensive, generally does not constitute a
hostile environment. Occasional insensitive and off-hand comments, even if inappropriate
or unprofessional, will generally not create a hostile environment. The focus is whether
the behavior, as a whole, affecting a personï¿½s education or working environment. In order to interfere with a personï¿½s work or educational environment, generally
the conduct must be severe, recurring and pervasive so that it interferes with your
Although an occasional comment may not constitute a violation of the Universityï¿½s
nondiscrimination policy, other provisions of University policy governing student
and employee conduct may apply. It is important to mention that the University, in
terms of student, visitor, and employee conduct, has an interest in preventing discrimination
and harassment. For example, if a department has an employee who tells an inappropriate
joke then other employees begin to participate in similar types of comments, believing
that such behavior is condoned, the workplace can then develop into a hostile environment
If someone feels like they are experiencing a hostile environment, what options are
The first step is to tell the individual that their comments are unwelcome and unwanted.
Sometimes this may be difficult but once you have made it clear that their comments
are not welcome, the individual has clearly been notified that you find their behavior
unwelcome and offensive. Once the individual clearly understands the behavior isnï¿½t
welcome yet continues to engage in similar behavior, disciplinary action may be appropriate.
There are many options on the University campus that can assist you in addressing
the unwanted and unwelcome behavior. The Office of the Dean of Students, Human Resources, and the Office of Equal Opportunity are all avenues that can assist you in addressing
How are issues like these handled to protect the person dealing with hostility while
The Office of Equal Opportunity is neutral and impartial whose purpose in an investigation
is to determine the facts. Both parties are provided an opportunity to provide their
side of the story. Obtaining both the perspective of the person dealing with the hostility
as well as the person alleged to have engaged in the behavior is important in terms
of treating both parties fairly. Although both parties are given an opportunity to
provide their side of the story, it is important to remember that it doesnï¿½t matter
whether the behavior was intended to hurt the other individual. An investigation by
the Office of Equal Opportunity would look at whether a reasonable person would take
University policy prohibits retaliation against an individual for having made a complaint,
testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, hearing, or
proceeding under the Universityï¿½s nondiscrimination policies or for interfering with
the rights of individuals under the Universityï¿½s nondiscrimination policies.
demoting, disciplining, or harassing an employee because the employee files or reports
interfering with witnesses or others who may be interviewed as part of an investigation
giving a lower grade because a student does not accede to sexual advances
If you believe you have experienced discriminatory conduct, including sexual misconduct,
Office of Equal Opportunity,ï¿½ Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
The University of Utah does not discriminate on the basis of race, ethnicity, color,
religion, national origin, sex, pregnancy, pregnancy-related conditions, age, disability,
sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, genetic information or protected
veteranï¿½s status, in employment, treatment, admission, access to educational programs
The University does not discriminate on the basis of sex in the education program
or activity that it operates, as required by Title IX and 34 CFR part 106.ï¿½ The requirement
not to discriminate in education programs or activities extends to admission and employment.
Inquiries about the application of Title IX and its regulations may be referred to
the Title IX Coordinator, to the Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights,
Additionally, the University endeavors to provide reasonable accommodations and to
ensure equal access to qualified persons with disabilities. Click here to request a reasonable accommodation.
Where discrimination is found to have occurred, the University will take reasonable
steps to investigate the matter, stop the harassment, prevent its recurrence and remedy
If you or someone you know has experienced discrimination, sexual misconduct including
sexual harassment, or disability discrimination, we encourage you to report it to
the University's designated and authorized Title IX/ADA/Section 504 Coordinator in
Sherrie Hayashi, DirectorTitle IX/ADA/Section 504 CoordinatorOffice of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)201 South Presidents Circle, Rm.135ï¿½Salt Lake City, UT, 84112801-581-8365ï¿½801-585-5746 (fax)oeo@utah.eduwww.oeo.utah.eduOnline reports may be submitted at oeo.utah.edu
To file a formal complaint of discrimination, sexual misconduct (including sexual
harassment or violence), or retaliation, under University of Utah Non-Discrimination
Policy, contact the OEO/AA.ï¿½ ï¿½A formal complaint may be filed with the OEO/AA in person,
A Formal Complaint of Sex or Gender-Based Harassment within the scope of Title IX
is timely if at the time of filing a Formal Complaint, the Complainant is participating
A Formal Complaint alleging any other type of Sexual Misconduct, or other type of
Discrimination is timely if filed within 180 calendar days of the last alleged discriminatory
A Formal Complaint of Retaliation is timey filed if filed within 180 days of the last
A Formal Complaint not filed within the appropriate time period above will be dismissed
as untimely filed; however, at the Director's discretion and for good cause, the complaint
may be accepted as if filed within the appropriate time period.
University of UtahOffice of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)201 S. Presidents Circle, Room 135Salt Lake City, UTï¿½ 84112Telephone: 801-581-8365Fax: 801-585-5746oeo@utah.eduwww.oeo.utah.eduOnline reports may be submitted at oeo.utah.edu
For specific information related to University Policy, please see:
regulations.utah.edu/general/1-012.phpregulations.utah.edu/general/1-011.php
EXTERNAL AGENCIES:ï¿½ Filing a complaint with the University of Utahï¿½s Title IX/504/ADA Coordinator (or
designee) does not preventï¿½an individual from filing a complaint with an appropriate
regulatory agency. To file a complaint regarding discrimination, including sexual
harassment, or retaliation with a regulatory state or federal agency, please see the
agency information below.ï¿½ For information about the time frames in which complaints
Education: Complaints regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title IX of the Education
Amendments of 1972, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Title II of the
Americans with Disabilities Act, Age Discrimination Act of 1975.
United States Department of EducationOffice for Civil Rightsï¿½ Region VIIICesar E. Chavez Memorial Building1244 Speer Boulevard, Suite 310Denver, Colorado 80204-3582Telephone: 303-844-5695FAX: 303-844-4303
Online complaint portal: http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/docs/howto.htmlwww2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/index.html
Employment:State Agency:ï¿½ Individual complaints regarding: Utah Anti-Discrimination Act of 1965,
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, Age Discrimination in Employment
Act of 1967, as amended, and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.ï¿½Utah Anti-Discrimination and Labor Division (UALD)160 East 300 South, 3rd floorP.O. Box 146630Salt Lake City, Utah 84114-6630Telephone: 801-530-6801www.laborcommission.utah.gov
Federal Agencies:Complaints regarding: Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, The Pregnancy Discrimination
Act, Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, as amended (ADEA), Equal Pay Act
of 1963, Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act of 2008, Sections
501 and 505 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and Section 102 and 103 of the Civil
Rights Act of 1991, the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 (GINA)ï¿½Equal Employment Opportunity CommissionPhoenix District Office3300 North Central Avenue, Suite 690Phoenix, AZ 85012Telephone: 1-800-669-4000TTY:ï¿½ 1-800-669-6820Fax: 602-640-5071www.eeoc.govï¿½U.S. Department of LaborOffice of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP)Denver District Office1244 Speer Blvd, Suite 540Denver, CO 80204Phone 720-264-3200Fax:ï¿½ 720-264-3211https://www.dol.gov/ofccp/index.htmï¿½Executive Order 11246 (Equal Employment and Affirmative Action)Americans with Disability Act Amendments Act, of 2008Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 197338 USC 4212 ï¿½ The Vietnam Era Veteransï¿½ Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974Uniformed Service Employment and Re-employment Rights Act (USERRA)Online complaint portal:www.dol.gov/elaws/vets/userra/ee_disc.aspï¿½Veteranï¿½s Employment and Training Service140 East 300 South, Room 209Salt Lake City, UT 84111Telephone: 801-526-0950jobs.utah.gov/jobseeker/veterans/employtrain.html
Housing (Residents of dorms and family student housing)State Agency:ï¿½ Complaints regarding: Utah Fair Housing Act of 1993, as amended.
Utah Anti-Discrimination and Labor Division (UALD)160 East 300 South, 3rd floorSalt Lake City, Utah 84114-6630Telephone: 801-530-6801www.laborcommission.utah.govï¿½Federal Agency:ï¿½ U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (ï¿½HUDï¿½) Complaints
regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, Title VIII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1968 (Fair Housing Act), Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Action
of 1973, as amended, Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, Age
Discrimination Act of 1975, Title IX of the Education Amendments Act, and Architectural
Barriers Act of 1968.ï¿½U.S. Department of Housing & Urban Development (HUD)1670 Broadway, 25th floorDenver, Colorado 80202-4801Telephone: (303)672-5440Fax: (303)672-5004Online complaint portal: https://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/topics/housing_discriminationï¿½Health care, human services, and health insurance plans (Patients and Participants):ï¿½ Complaints regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, Title
II of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and the Community Service Assurance
provisions of the Hill-Burton Actï¿½U.S. Department of Health & Human ServicesOffice for Civil Rights, DHHS ï¿½ Region VIII1961 Stout Street Room 08-148Denver, CO 80294Customer Response Center 1-800-368-1019TDD:ï¿½ 1-800-537-7697Email: Ocrmail@hhs.govOnline complaint portal: https://ocrportal.hhs.gov/ocr/smartscreen/main.jsfWebsite: www.hhs.gov/ocrCampus Accessibility Website:ï¿½https://accessibility.utah.edu
Research Safety & Title IX – Office of Undergraduate Research
OUR Research Opportunity Database
Faculty & Research Mentor Resources
Undergraduate Research Advisory Council
Education, Events, PublicationOUR Events Calendar
Undergraduate Research Symposium (URS)
Utah Conference on Undergraduate Research (UCUR)
CUR Conferences on Undergraduate Research (UCUR & NCUR)
Range: Undergraduate Research Journal
Funding & RecognitionApply for Funding
Research & Scholarship Opportunities
Early Exploration Scholars Program
Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program (UROP)
OUR Research Opportunity Database
Powered by the University of Utah
Office of Undergraduate Research                                                        Undergraduate Studies
Go back to URES Events Calendar >>
In this session, you will learn about the Office of Equal Opportunity (OEO) and Title IX regulations, resources & support, as well as why safety and sexual misconduct matters in research contexts.  You will work through a few case scenarios to practice identifying appropriate actions to take in various situations concerning sexual misconduct.  This session will be helpful for any researcher at any stage in their research experience, as the content directly contributes to the overall working environment in research on and off campus and to understanding our roles in preventing and reporting sexual misconduct.
Presenter Name: Annie Isabel Fukushima and Erica WoodTrack:Research Basics & Skill BuildingSocial Justice & Ethics in Research
OUR Quick LinksResearch Advising
Education, Events, PublicationOUR Events Calendar
Undergraduate Research Symposium (URS)
Utah Conference on Undergraduate Research (UCUR)
CUR Conferences on Undergraduate Research (UCUR & NCUR)
Range: Undergraduate Research Journal
Office of Undergraduate Research
SILL CENTER SALT LAKE CITY, UT 84112
Funding & RecognitionApply for Funding
Research & Scholarship Opportunities
Early Exploration Scholars Program
Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program (UROP)
OUR Research Opportunity Database
Faculty & PartnershipsFaculty Affiliates
OUR Faculty Mentors: Summer Programs
Undergraduate Research Advisory Council
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Research Safety & Title IX – Office of Undergraduate Research
OUR Research Opportunity Database
Faculty & Research Mentor Resources
Undergraduate Research Advisory Council
Education, Events, PublicationOUR Events Calendar
Undergraduate Research Symposium (URS)
Utah Conference on Undergraduate Research (UCUR)
CUR Conferences on Undergraduate Research (UCUR & NCUR)
Range: Undergraduate Research Journal
Funding & RecognitionApply for Funding
Research & Scholarship Opportunities
Early Exploration Scholars Program
Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program (UROP)
OUR Research Opportunity Database
Powered by the University of Utah
Office of Undergraduate Research                                                        Undergraduate Studies
Go back to URES Events Calendar >>
In this session, you will learn about the Office of Equal Opportunity (OEO) and Title IX regulations, resources & support, as well as why safety and sexual misconduct matters in research contexts.  You will work through a few case scenarios to practice identifying appropriate actions to take in various situations concerning sexual misconduct.  This session will be helpful for any researcher at any stage in their research experience, as the content directly contributes to the overall working environment in research on and off campus and to understanding our roles in preventing and reporting sexual misconduct.
Presenter Name: Annie Isabel Fukushima and Erica WoodTrack:Research Basics & Skill BuildingSocial Justice & Ethics in Research
OUR Quick LinksResearch Advising
Education, Events, PublicationOUR Events Calendar
Undergraduate Research Symposium (URS)
Utah Conference on Undergraduate Research (UCUR)
CUR Conferences on Undergraduate Research (UCUR & NCUR)
Range: Undergraduate Research Journal
Office of Undergraduate Research
SILL CENTER SALT LAKE CITY, UT 84112
Funding & RecognitionApply for Funding
Research & Scholarship Opportunities
Early Exploration Scholars Program
Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program (UROP)
OUR Research Opportunity Database
Faculty & PartnershipsFaculty Affiliates
OUR Faculty Mentors: Summer Programs
Undergraduate Research Advisory Council
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Nondiscrimination Statement - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Student Leadership & Involvement
Student Leadership & Involvement
Current Page: Nondiscrimination Statement
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility Statement
The University of Utah does not discriminate on the basis of race, ethnicity, color,
religion, national origin, sex, pregnancy, pregnancy-related conditions, age, disability,
sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, genetic information or protected
veteran’s status, in employment, treatment, admission, access to educational programs
and activities, or other University benefits or services.
The University does not discriminate on the basis of sex in the education program
or activity that it operates, as required by Title IX and 34 CFR part 106.  The requirement
not to discriminate in education programs or activities extends to admission and employment.
Inquiries about the application of Title IX and its regulations may be referred to
the Title IX Coordinator, to the Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights,
Additionally, the University endeavors to provide reasonable accommodations and to
ensure equal access to qualified persons with disabilities. Click here to request a reasonable accommodation.
Where discrimination is found to have occurred, the University will take reasonable
steps to investigate the matter, stop the harassment, prevent its recurrence and remedy
If you or someone you know has experienced discrimination, sexual misconduct including
sexual harassment, or disability discrimination, we encourage you to report it to
the University's designated and authorized Title IX/ADA/Section 504 Coordinator in
the Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action:
Sherrie Hayashi, DirectorTitle IX/ADA/Section 504 CoordinatorOffice of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)201 South Presidents Circle, Rm.135 Salt Lake City, UT, 84112801-581-8365 801-585-5746 (fax)oeo@utah.eduwww.oeo.utah.eduOnline reports may be submitted at oeo.utah.edu
To file a formal complaint of discrimination, sexual misconduct (including sexual
harassment or violence), or retaliation, under University of Utah Non-Discrimination
Policy, contact the OEO/AA.   A formal complaint may be filed with the OEO/AA in person,
by mail, or by electronic mail.
A Formal Complaint of Sex or Gender-Based Harassment within the scope of Title IX
is timely if at the time of filing a Formal Complaint, the Complainant is participating
in or attempting to participate in a University Program.
A Formal Complaint alleging any other type of Sexual Misconduct, or other type of
Discrimination is timely if filed within 180 calendar days of the last alleged discriminatory
A Formal Complaint of Retaliation is timey filed if filed within 180 days of the last
A Formal Complaint not filed within the appropriate time period above will be dismissed
as untimely filed; however, at the Director's discretion and for good cause, the complaint
may be accepted as if filed within the appropriate time period.
University of UtahOffice of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)201 S. Presidents Circle, Room 135Salt Lake City, UT  84112Telephone: 801-581-8365Fax: 801-585-5746oeo@utah.eduwww.oeo.utah.eduOnline reports may be submitted at oeo.utah.edu
For specific information related to University Policy, please see:
regulations.utah.edu/general/1-012.phpregulations.utah.edu/general/1-011.php
EXTERNAL AGENCIES:  Filing a complaint with the University of Utah’s Title IX/504/ADA Coordinator (or
designee) does not prevent an individual from filing a complaint with an appropriate
regulatory agency. To file a complaint regarding discrimination, including sexual
harassment, or retaliation with a regulatory state or federal agency, please see the
agency information below.  For information about the time frames in which complaints
must be filed, please contact the relevant agency.
Education: Complaints regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title IX of the Education
Amendments of 1972, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Title II of the
Americans with Disabilities Act, Age Discrimination Act of 1975.
United States Department of EducationOffice for Civil Rights– Region VIIICesar E. Chavez Memorial Building1244 Speer Boulevard, Suite 310Denver, Colorado 80204-3582Telephone: 303-844-5695FAX: 303-844-4303
Online complaint portal: http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/docs/howto.htmlwww2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/index.html
Employment:State Agency:  Individual complaints regarding: Utah Anti-Discrimination Act of 1965,
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, Age Discrimination in Employment
Act of 1967, as amended, and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. Utah Anti-Discrimination and Labor Division (UALD)160 East 300 South, 3rd floorP.O. Box 146630Salt Lake City, Utah 84114-6630Telephone: 801-530-6801www.laborcommission.utah.gov
Federal Agencies:Complaints regarding: Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, The Pregnancy Discrimination
Act, Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, as amended (ADEA), Equal Pay Act
of 1963, Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act of 2008, Sections
501 and 505 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and Section 102 and 103 of the Civil
Rights Act of 1991, the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 (GINA) Equal Employment Opportunity CommissionPhoenix District Office3300 North Central Avenue, Suite 690Phoenix, AZ 85012Telephone: 1-800-669-4000TTY:  1-800-669-6820Fax: 602-640-5071www.eeoc.gov U.S. Department of LaborOffice of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP)Denver District Office1244 Speer Blvd, Suite 540Denver, CO 80204Phone 720-264-3200Fax:  720-264-3211https://www.dol.gov/ofccp/index.htm Executive Order 11246 (Equal Employment and Affirmative Action)Americans with Disability Act Amendments Act, of 2008Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 197338 USC 4212 – The Vietnam Era Veterans’ Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974Uniformed Service Employment and Re-employment Rights Act (USERRA)Online complaint portal:www.dol.gov/elaws/vets/userra/ee_disc.asp Veteran’s Employment and Training Service140 East 300 South, Room 209Salt Lake City, UT 84111Telephone: 801-526-0950jobs.utah.gov/jobseeker/veterans/employtrain.html
Housing (Residents of dorms and family student housing)State Agency:  Complaints regarding: Utah Fair Housing Act of 1993, as amended.
Utah Anti-Discrimination and Labor Division (UALD)160 East 300 South, 3rd floorSalt Lake City, Utah 84114-6630Telephone: 801-530-6801www.laborcommission.utah.gov Federal Agency:  U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”) Complaints
regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, Title VIII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1968 (Fair Housing Act), Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Action
of 1973, as amended, Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, Age
Discrimination Act of 1975, Title IX of the Education Amendments Act, and Architectural
Barriers Act of 1968. U.S. Department of Housing & Urban Development (HUD)1670 Broadway, 25th floorDenver, Colorado 80202-4801Telephone: (303)672-5440Fax: (303)672-5004Online complaint portal: https://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/topics/housing_discrimination Health care, human services, and health insurance plans (Patients and Participants):  Complaints regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, Title
II of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and the Community Service Assurance
provisions of the Hill-Burton Act U.S. Department of Health & Human ServicesOffice for Civil Rights, DHHS – Region VIII1961 Stout Street Room 08-148Denver, CO 80294Customer Response Center 1-800-368-1019TDD:  1-800-537-7697Email: Ocrmail@hhs.govOnline complaint portal: https://ocrportal.hhs.gov/ocr/smartscreen/main.jsfWebsite: www.hhs.gov/ocrCampus Accessibility Website: https://accessibility.utah.edu
201 Presidents Circle Salt Lake City, UT 84112 801.581.7200
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Title IX Training Materials - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
current page: Title IX Training Materials
Posting of Title IX Training Materials:
Consistent with Department of Education Title IX regulatory requirements, the following
training materials are being made available for inspection.  The materials below have
been used to train Title IX Coordinators, investigators, decision-makers, and any
person who facilitates an informal resolution process for training completed on or
after August 14, 2020.  In some instances the Office of Equal Opportunity is providing
material from training prior to August 14, 2020, where the material is available and
the holder of the copyright provided permission to post the material for inspection.
Materials presented may copyrighted by author(s). Materials are not to be downloaded,
shared, or used for purposes other than review under than purposed listed in Section
106.45(b)(1)(iii) & § 106.45(b)(10)(i)(D) of Title IX, Education Amendments Act.
NASPA:  Track 1:  Title IX Coordinators
NASPA:  Track 2:  Title IX Decision-makers and Student Conduct Administrators
NAPSA: Facilitating Fair and Effective Informal Resolution Processes
University of Utah Hearing Training for Committee Members
Title IX Hearings and Appeals for Decision-Makers
Hearing Committee and University Appointed Advisory Training
Training for Title IX Coordinators and Investigators:
Employee Reporting and Training Requirements
Formal Complaints Jurisdiction and Associated Procedures
Title IX Hearings and Appeals for Decision-Makers
Title IX Coordinator Training: Pregnancy or Pregnancy-Related Conditions
Office of Equal Opportunity,  Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Title IX Training Materials - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
current page: Title IX Training Materials
Posting of Title IX Training Materials:
Consistent with Department of Education Title IX regulatory requirements, the following
training materials are being made available for inspection.  The materials below have
been used to train Title IX Coordinators, investigators, decision-makers, and any
person who facilitates an informal resolution process for training completed on or
after August 14, 2020.  In some instances the Office of Equal Opportunity is providing
material from training prior to August 14, 2020, where the material is available and
the holder of the copyright provided permission to post the material for inspection.
Materials presented may copyrighted by author(s). Materials are not to be downloaded,
shared, or used for purposes other than review under than purposed listed in Section
106.45(b)(1)(iii) & § 106.45(b)(10)(i)(D) of Title IX, Education Amendments Act.
NASPA:  Track 1:  Title IX Coordinators
NASPA:  Track 2:  Title IX Decision-makers and Student Conduct Administrators
NAPSA: Facilitating Fair and Effective Informal Resolution Processes
University of Utah Hearing Training for Committee Members
Title IX Hearings and Appeals for Decision-Makers
Hearing Committee and University Appointed Advisory Training
Training for Title IX Coordinators and Investigators:
Employee Reporting and Training Requirements
Formal Complaints Jurisdiction and Associated Procedures
Title IX Hearings and Appeals for Decision-Makers
Title IX Coordinator Training: Pregnancy or Pregnancy-Related Conditions
Office of Equal Opportunity,  Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Report Discrimination, Harassment or Sexual Misconduct
The Office of Equal Opportunity And Affirmative Action (OEO/AA) is dedicated to providing
a fair and equitable environment for all to pursue their academic and professional
endeavors and to equally access University programs.
The Office of Equal Opportunity/Title IX (OEO/AA) office is open for business; however,
due to the university’s commitment to slow the spread of the Coronavirus and contribute
to the health and well-being of our community, OEO/AA staff are telecommuting until
Our website contains a wealth of information about the policies and processes for
addressing discrimination, harassment, and sexual misconduct.  In addition, you may
You may reach us at (801) 581-8365 or oeo@utah.edu
Thank you for your patience, support, and understanding during this evolving situation.
OEO/AA provides disability, religious, and pregnancy accommodation forms.
Office of Equal Opportunity,  Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Sexual Misconduct - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
current page: Sexual Misconduct
University of Utah policy prohibits sex discrimination, which includes sexual misconduct.
Sexual Misconduct is the most egregious form of sex discrimination. Title IX of the
Education Amendments Act of 1972 is the comprehensive federal law that prohibits discrimination
on the basis of sex in any federally funded education program or activity.
Policies, procedures, and resources are in place to take immediate and appropriate
steps to remedy violations of University policy and the university will take steps
to end or eliminate the hostile environment, prevent its recurrence and to remedy
the effects, as appropriate under each individual’s circumstances.
Complaints of sexual misconduct should be made directly to the Office of Equal Opportunity
Please see the Title IX Coordinator Outreach letter to learn about your specific rights to seek out Supportive Measures and options for
accountability through the OEO/AA process or through law enforcement.
UNIVERSITY TITLE IX COORDINATOR
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112Phone: 801-581-8365Fax: 801-585-5746
As defined by University Rule, R1-012: Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Misconduct
is a broad term used to encompass a range of behaviors including Sexual or Gender-Based
Harassment, Intimate Partner Violence, Sexual Exploitation, Stalking, Nonconsensual
Sexual Contact, and Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration. Sexual Misconduct also includes
the crimes of dating violence, domestic violence, sexual assault and stalking as defined
by state and federal law. Sexual Misconduct is a form of Sex Discrimination. The following
definitions of prohibited conduct apply to University policies.
Sexual or Gender-Based Harassment
As defined by University Rule, R1-012, Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Harassment
means unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical
conduct of a sexual nature or based on an individual’s sex, sexual orientation, gender,
gender identity, or gender expression when:
Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition
of an individual’s employment, education, living environment, health care or participation
in a university program activity;
Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for
or a factor in decisions affecting that individual’s employment, education, living
environment, or participation in a university program or activity; or
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of interfering with an individual’s employment
or educational performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment
for that individual’s employment, education, living environment, or participation
in a university program or activity.
Consent means affirmative, unambiguous, and voluntary agreement. For a nonexhaustive
list of situations in which consent has not been given, see Utah Code Ann. 76-5-406.
means actual or threatened physical violence, intimidation, or other forms of physical
or sexual abuse that would cause a reasonable person to fear harm to self or others.
For this policy, “intimate relationship” means marriage, domestic partnership, engagement,
casual or serious romantic involvement, and dating, whether in a current or former
relationship. Intimate Partner Violence can occur between persons of any sex, sexual
orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, and it can occur in any
type of intimate relationship including monogamous, non-committed, and relationships
involving more than two partners. Intimate Partner Violence can be a single act or
a pattern of behavior. Intimate Partner Violence is sometimes referred to as, and
includes behaviors that would be considered, dating violence, domestic violence, or
relationship abuse. Examples of Intimate Partner Violence include, but are not limited
to, situations in which the following behaviors are directed toward a partner in a
current or former intimate relationship: hitting, kicking, strangling, or other violence;
property damage; and threat of violence to one’s self, one’s partner, or the family
members, friends, pets, or personal property of the partner. Intimate Partner Violence
is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
means any physical contact with another person of a sexual nature without that person’s
Consent. The touching of a person’s intimate parts (such as genitalia, groin, breast,
buttocks, mouth, or clothing covering same); touching a person with one’s own intimate
parts; or forcing a person to touch another’s intimate parts would be violations of
this policy if they occur without Consent. Nonconsensual Sexual Contact is a form
Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration
means the sexual penetration of any bodily opening with any object or body part without
Consent. This could be committed by force, threat, intimidation, or through exploitation of
another’s mental or physical condition (such as lack of consciousness, incapacitation
due to drugs or alcohol, age, or disability) of which the Respondent was actually
aware or which a reasonable person in the Respondent’s position should have been aware.
Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
means treating someone differently, i.e., disadvantaging the person, on the basis
of sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression when:
such conduct adversely affects a term or condition of an individual’s employment,
education, living environment, or participation in a University program or activity;
a person’s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity or expression is used
as the basis for or a factor in decisions affecting that individual’s employment,
education, living environment, health care, or participation in a University program
means any physical sexual act perpetrated against a person’s will or where a person
is incapable of giving consent (e.g., due to age or use of drugs or alcohol, or because
an intellectual or other disability prevents the person from having the capacity to
means engaging in a course of conduct directed at a specific person and based on that’s
person’s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, that
would cause a reasonable person to fear for the person’s safety or the safety of others
or suffer substantial emotional distress. Stalking is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
Discussion of issues or theories relating to sexuality or gender in an academic or
professional setting, when appropriate to subject matter, will be presumed not to
constitute sexual harassment even if it offends or embarrasses an individual unless
other factors are involved. Such factors include targeting the discussion to an individual
or carrying out the discussion in terms that are both patently unnecessary and gratuitously
Under university policy, most University employees are required to report situations
involving sexual misconduct and discrimination to the Office of Equal Opportunity
and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)
Some situations may be very personal; we respect your privacy and will protect it
in accordance with University of Utah policy and FERPA. Although information about
the situation may be reported to the OEO/AA, you have the right to choose to whom
you speak, what you say, when you say it and what resources you use. If you prefer
to speak first with a confidential resource (confidential resources are not required
to report information to the OEO/AA, you may contact one of the groups below.
Information provided to OEO/AA is considered private information and will only be shared with other appropriate university personnel on
a very strict need-to-know basis.
A collection of sites and areas containing additional information
Information about Sexual Assault Awareness & Response Support
Office of Equal Opportunity,  Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Prohibited Discrimination - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Current Page: Prohibited Discrimination
Discrimination is partiality or bias in the treatment of a person or group that is
unfair or violates law or policy. Treating someone differently based on a protected class violates University policy. A protected class is a group of people protected against
discrimination by University policy or by state and federal law.
icon Color icon Raceicon Ethnicityicon National Originicon Ageicon Religionicon Disabilityicon Veteran Statusicon Pregnancy icon Sexicon Sexual Orientationicon Gender Identityicon Gender Expressionicon Genetic Information
Not all discrimination violates law or policy. One can be subject to unfair treatment
that does not violate University policy or state or federal law. An example would
be being treated unfairly because someone doesn’t like you or because of your political
What is Discriminatory Harassment?
The University’s nondiscrimination policy applies broadly to students, employees,
and visitors. Hostile environment is a commonly used term but from a legal and policy
perspective, a hostile environment is a form of discriminatory harassment.
Harassment means unwelcome or offensive conduct which has the purpose or effect of
interfering with an individuals’ work or academic environment or creating an intimidating
hostile, offensive or otherwise working or learning environment based upon a person’s
race, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, religion, sexual orientation,
gender identity, gender expression, or protected veteran’s status. The University’s
Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA) is responsible for the
University’s nondiscrimination policies.
Many people have heard the term “hostile environment” in the context of sexual harassment
but a “hostile environment” can also include harassment because of race, color, national
origin, age, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression and
protected veteran’s status. For harassment not related to discrimination, contact
What constitutes a hostile environment? What are the range of scenarios that people
A hostile environment can be created in many ways. Verbal comments, text messages,
pictures, graphics, graffiti and physical conduct can create a hostile environment.
This might look like racial slurs, comments about a person’s national origin, or behavior
or words that mock, demean, put down, disparage, threaten or ridicule others based
upon race, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, religion, sexual orientation,
gender identity/expression and protected veteran’s status.
An isolated statement, even if rude and offensive, generally does not constitute a
hostile environment. Occasional insensitive and off-hand comments, even if inappropriate
or unprofessional, will generally not create a hostile environment. The focus is whether
the behavior, as a whole, affecting a person’s education or working environment. In order to interfere with a person’s work or educational environment, generally
the conduct must be severe, recurring and pervasive so that it interferes with your
ability to fulfill your work and academic pursuits.
Although an occasional comment may not constitute a violation of the University’s
nondiscrimination policy, other provisions of University policy governing student
and employee conduct may apply. It is important to mention that the University, in
terms of student, visitor, and employee conduct, has an interest in preventing discrimination
and harassment. For example, if a department has an employee who tells an inappropriate
joke then other employees begin to participate in similar types of comments, believing
that such behavior is condoned, the workplace can then develop into a hostile environment
for those that find such conduct unwelcome and offensive.
If someone feels like they are experiencing a hostile environment, what options are
open to them to deal with the situation?
The first step is to tell the individual that their comments are unwelcome and unwanted.
Sometimes this may be difficult but once you have made it clear that their comments
are not welcome, the individual has clearly been notified that you find their behavior
unwelcome and offensive. Once the individual clearly understands the behavior isn’t
welcome yet continues to engage in similar behavior, disciplinary action may be appropriate.
There are many options on the University campus that can assist you in addressing
the unwanted and unwelcome behavior. The Office of the Dean of Students, Human Resources, and the Office of Equal Opportunity are all avenues that can assist you in addressing
How are issues like these handled to protect the person dealing with hostility while
also being fair to the Respondent?
The Office of Equal Opportunity is neutral and impartial whose purpose in an investigation
is to determine the facts. Both parties are provided an opportunity to provide their
side of the story. Obtaining both the perspective of the person dealing with the hostility
as well as the person alleged to have engaged in the behavior is important in terms
of treating both parties fairly. Although both parties are given an opportunity to
provide their side of the story, it is important to remember that it doesn’t matter
whether the behavior was intended to hurt the other individual. An investigation by
the Office of Equal Opportunity would look at whether a reasonable person would take
offense to the unwanted or unwelcome behavior.
University policy prohibits retaliation against an individual for having made a complaint,
testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, hearing, or
proceeding under the University’s nondiscrimination policies or for interfering with
the rights of individuals under the University’s nondiscrimination policies.
Examples of retaliation include:
demoting, disciplining, or harassing an employee because the employee files or reports
discrimination or sexual misconduct to OEO/AA
interfering with witnesses or others who may be interviewed as part of an investigation
giving a lower grade because a student does not accede to sexual advances
If you believe you have experienced discriminatory conduct, including sexual misconduct,
or retaliation, you may file a complaint with our office.
Office of Equal Opportunity,  Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Title IX Training Materials - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
current page: Title IX Training Materials
Posting of Title IX Training Materials:
Consistent with Department of Education Title IX regulatory requirements, the following
training materials are being made available for inspection.  The materials below have
been used to train Title IX Coordinators, investigators, decision-makers, and any
person who facilitates an informal resolution process for training completed on or
after August 14, 2020.  In some instances the Office of Equal Opportunity is providing
material from training prior to August 14, 2020, where the material is available and
the holder of the copyright provided permission to post the material for inspection.
Materials presented may copyrighted by author(s). Materials are not to be downloaded,
shared, or used for purposes other than review under than purposed listed in Section
106.45(b)(1)(iii) & § 106.45(b)(10)(i)(D) of Title IX, Education Amendments Act.
NASPA:  Track 1:  Title IX Coordinators
NASPA:  Track 2:  Title IX Decision-makers and Student Conduct Administrators
NAPSA: Facilitating Fair and Effective Informal Resolution Processes
University of Utah Hearing Training for Committee Members
Title IX Hearings and Appeals for Decision-Makers
Hearing Committee and University Appointed Advisory Training
Training for Title IX Coordinators and Investigators:
Employee Reporting and Training Requirements
Formal Complaints Jurisdiction and Associated Procedures
Title IX Hearings and Appeals for Decision-Makers
Title IX Coordinator Training: Pregnancy or Pregnancy-Related Conditions
Office of Equal Opportunity,  Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Sexual Misconduct - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
current page: Sexual Misconduct
University of Utah policy prohibits sex discrimination, which includes sexual misconduct.
Sexual Misconduct is the most egregious form of sex discrimination. Title IX of the
Education Amendments Act of 1972 is the comprehensive federal law that prohibits discrimination
on the basis of sex in any federally funded education program or activity.
Policies, procedures, and resources are in place to take immediate and appropriate
steps to remedy violations of University policy and the university will take steps
to end or eliminate the hostile environment, prevent its recurrence and to remedy
the effects, as appropriate under each individual’s circumstances.
Complaints of sexual misconduct should be made directly to the Office of Equal Opportunity
Please see the Title IX Coordinator Outreach letter to learn about your specific rights to seek out Supportive Measures and options for
accountability through the OEO/AA process or through law enforcement.
UNIVERSITY TITLE IX COORDINATOR
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112Phone: 801-581-8365Fax: 801-585-5746
As defined by University Rule, R1-012: Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Misconduct
is a broad term used to encompass a range of behaviors including Sexual or Gender-Based
Harassment, Intimate Partner Violence, Sexual Exploitation, Stalking, Nonconsensual
Sexual Contact, and Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration. Sexual Misconduct also includes
the crimes of dating violence, domestic violence, sexual assault and stalking as defined
by state and federal law. Sexual Misconduct is a form of Sex Discrimination. The following
definitions of prohibited conduct apply to University policies.
Sexual or Gender-Based Harassment
As defined by University Rule, R1-012, Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Harassment
means unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical
conduct of a sexual nature or based on an individual’s sex, sexual orientation, gender,
gender identity, or gender expression when:
Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition
of an individual’s employment, education, living environment, health care or participation
in a university program activity;
Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for
or a factor in decisions affecting that individual’s employment, education, living
environment, or participation in a university program or activity; or
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of interfering with an individual’s employment
or educational performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment
for that individual’s employment, education, living environment, or participation
in a university program or activity.
Consent means affirmative, unambiguous, and voluntary agreement. For a nonexhaustive
list of situations in which consent has not been given, see Utah Code Ann. 76-5-406.
means actual or threatened physical violence, intimidation, or other forms of physical
or sexual abuse that would cause a reasonable person to fear harm to self or others.
For this policy, “intimate relationship” means marriage, domestic partnership, engagement,
casual or serious romantic involvement, and dating, whether in a current or former
relationship. Intimate Partner Violence can occur between persons of any sex, sexual
orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, and it can occur in any
type of intimate relationship including monogamous, non-committed, and relationships
involving more than two partners. Intimate Partner Violence can be a single act or
a pattern of behavior. Intimate Partner Violence is sometimes referred to as, and
includes behaviors that would be considered, dating violence, domestic violence, or
relationship abuse. Examples of Intimate Partner Violence include, but are not limited
to, situations in which the following behaviors are directed toward a partner in a
current or former intimate relationship: hitting, kicking, strangling, or other violence;
property damage; and threat of violence to one’s self, one’s partner, or the family
members, friends, pets, or personal property of the partner. Intimate Partner Violence
is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
means any physical contact with another person of a sexual nature without that person’s
Consent. The touching of a person’s intimate parts (such as genitalia, groin, breast,
buttocks, mouth, or clothing covering same); touching a person with one’s own intimate
parts; or forcing a person to touch another’s intimate parts would be violations of
this policy if they occur without Consent. Nonconsensual Sexual Contact is a form
Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration
means the sexual penetration of any bodily opening with any object or body part without
Consent. This could be committed by force, threat, intimidation, or through exploitation of
another’s mental or physical condition (such as lack of consciousness, incapacitation
due to drugs or alcohol, age, or disability) of which the Respondent was actually
aware or which a reasonable person in the Respondent’s position should have been aware.
Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
means treating someone differently, i.e., disadvantaging the person, on the basis
of sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression when:
such conduct adversely affects a term or condition of an individual’s employment,
education, living environment, or participation in a University program or activity;
a person’s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity or expression is used
as the basis for or a factor in decisions affecting that individual’s employment,
education, living environment, health care, or participation in a University program
means any physical sexual act perpetrated against a person’s will or where a person
is incapable of giving consent (e.g., due to age or use of drugs or alcohol, or because
an intellectual or other disability prevents the person from having the capacity to
means engaging in a course of conduct directed at a specific person and based on that’s
person’s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, that
would cause a reasonable person to fear for the person’s safety or the safety of others
or suffer substantial emotional distress. Stalking is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
Discussion of issues or theories relating to sexuality or gender in an academic or
professional setting, when appropriate to subject matter, will be presumed not to
constitute sexual harassment even if it offends or embarrasses an individual unless
other factors are involved. Such factors include targeting the discussion to an individual
or carrying out the discussion in terms that are both patently unnecessary and gratuitously
Under university policy, most University employees are required to report situations
involving sexual misconduct and discrimination to the Office of Equal Opportunity
and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)
Some situations may be very personal; we respect your privacy and will protect it
in accordance with University of Utah policy and FERPA. Although information about
the situation may be reported to the OEO/AA, you have the right to choose to whom
you speak, what you say, when you say it and what resources you use. If you prefer
to speak first with a confidential resource (confidential resources are not required
to report information to the OEO/AA, you may contact one of the groups below.
Information provided to OEO/AA is considered private information and will only be shared with other appropriate university personnel on
a very strict need-to-know basis.
A collection of sites and areas containing additional information
Information about Sexual Assault Awareness & Response Support
Office of Equal Opportunity,  Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Prohibited Discrimination - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Current Page: Prohibited Discrimination
Discrimination is partiality or bias in the treatment of a person or group that is
unfair or violates law or policy. Treating someone differently based on a protected class violates University policy. A protected class is a group of people protected against
discrimination by University policy or by state and federal law.
icon Color icon Raceicon Ethnicityicon National Originicon Ageicon Religionicon Disabilityicon Veteran Statusicon Pregnancy icon Sexicon Sexual Orientationicon Gender Identityicon Gender Expressionicon Genetic Information
Not all discrimination violates law or policy. One can be subject to unfair treatment
that does not violate University policy or state or federal law. An example would
be being treated unfairly because someone doesn’t like you or because of your political
What is Discriminatory Harassment?
The University’s nondiscrimination policy applies broadly to students, employees,
and visitors. Hostile environment is a commonly used term but from a legal and policy
perspective, a hostile environment is a form of discriminatory harassment.
Harassment means unwelcome or offensive conduct which has the purpose or effect of
interfering with an individuals’ work or academic environment or creating an intimidating
hostile, offensive or otherwise working or learning environment based upon a person’s
race, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, religion, sexual orientation,
gender identity, gender expression, or protected veteran’s status. The University’s
Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA) is responsible for the
University’s nondiscrimination policies.
Many people have heard the term “hostile environment” in the context of sexual harassment
but a “hostile environment” can also include harassment because of race, color, national
origin, age, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression and
protected veteran’s status. For harassment not related to discrimination, contact
What constitutes a hostile environment? What are the range of scenarios that people
A hostile environment can be created in many ways. Verbal comments, text messages,
pictures, graphics, graffiti and physical conduct can create a hostile environment.
This might look like racial slurs, comments about a person’s national origin, or behavior
or words that mock, demean, put down, disparage, threaten or ridicule others based
upon race, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, religion, sexual orientation,
gender identity/expression and protected veteran’s status.
An isolated statement, even if rude and offensive, generally does not constitute a
hostile environment. Occasional insensitive and off-hand comments, even if inappropriate
or unprofessional, will generally not create a hostile environment. The focus is whether
the behavior, as a whole, affecting a person’s education or working environment. In order to interfere with a person’s work or educational environment, generally
the conduct must be severe, recurring and pervasive so that it interferes with your
ability to fulfill your work and academic pursuits.
Although an occasional comment may not constitute a violation of the University’s
nondiscrimination policy, other provisions of University policy governing student
and employee conduct may apply. It is important to mention that the University, in
terms of student, visitor, and employee conduct, has an interest in preventing discrimination
and harassment. For example, if a department has an employee who tells an inappropriate
joke then other employees begin to participate in similar types of comments, believing
that such behavior is condoned, the workplace can then develop into a hostile environment
for those that find such conduct unwelcome and offensive.
If someone feels like they are experiencing a hostile environment, what options are
open to them to deal with the situation?
The first step is to tell the individual that their comments are unwelcome and unwanted.
Sometimes this may be difficult but once you have made it clear that their comments
are not welcome, the individual has clearly been notified that you find their behavior
unwelcome and offensive. Once the individual clearly understands the behavior isn’t
welcome yet continues to engage in similar behavior, disciplinary action may be appropriate.
There are many options on the University campus that can assist you in addressing
the unwanted and unwelcome behavior. The Office of the Dean of Students, Human Resources, and the Office of Equal Opportunity are all avenues that can assist you in addressing
How are issues like these handled to protect the person dealing with hostility while
also being fair to the Respondent?
The Office of Equal Opportunity is neutral and impartial whose purpose in an investigation
is to determine the facts. Both parties are provided an opportunity to provide their
side of the story. Obtaining both the perspective of the person dealing with the hostility
as well as the person alleged to have engaged in the behavior is important in terms
of treating both parties fairly. Although both parties are given an opportunity to
provide their side of the story, it is important to remember that it doesn’t matter
whether the behavior was intended to hurt the other individual. An investigation by
the Office of Equal Opportunity would look at whether a reasonable person would take
offense to the unwanted or unwelcome behavior.
University policy prohibits retaliation against an individual for having made a complaint,
testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, hearing, or
proceeding under the University’s nondiscrimination policies or for interfering with
the rights of individuals under the University’s nondiscrimination policies.
Examples of retaliation include:
demoting, disciplining, or harassing an employee because the employee files or reports
discrimination or sexual misconduct to OEO/AA
interfering with witnesses or others who may be interviewed as part of an investigation
giving a lower grade because a student does not accede to sexual advances
If you believe you have experienced discriminatory conduct, including sexual misconduct,
or retaliation, you may file a complaint with our office.
Office of Equal Opportunity,  Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Title IX Training Materials - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
current page: Title IX Training Materials
Posting of Title IX Training Materials:
Consistent with Department of Education Title IX regulatory requirements, the following
training materials are being made available for inspection.  The materials below have
been used to train Title IX Coordinators, investigators, decision-makers, and any
person who facilitates an informal resolution process for training completed on or
after August 14, 2020.  In some instances the Office of Equal Opportunity is providing
material from training prior to August 14, 2020, where the material is available and
the holder of the copyright provided permission to post the material for inspection.
Materials presented may copyrighted by author(s). Materials are not to be downloaded,
shared, or used for purposes other than review under than purposed listed in Section
106.45(b)(1)(iii) & § 106.45(b)(10)(i)(D) of Title IX, Education Amendments Act.
NASPA:  Track 1:  Title IX Coordinators
NASPA:  Track 2:  Title IX Decision-makers and Student Conduct Administrators
NAPSA: Facilitating Fair and Effective Informal Resolution Processes
University of Utah Hearing Training for Committee Members
Title IX Hearings and Appeals for Decision-Makers
Hearing Committee and University Appointed Advisory Training
Training for Title IX Coordinators and Investigators:
Employee Reporting and Training Requirements
Formal Complaints Jurisdiction and Associated Procedures
Title IX Hearings and Appeals for Decision-Makers
Title IX Coordinator Training: Pregnancy or Pregnancy-Related Conditions
Office of Equal Opportunity,  Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Sexual Misconduct - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
current page: Sexual Misconduct
University of Utah policy prohibits sex discrimination, which includes sexual misconduct.
Sexual Misconduct is the most egregious form of sex discrimination. Title IX of the
Education Amendments Act of 1972 is the comprehensive federal law that prohibits discrimination
on the basis of sex in any federally funded education program or activity.
Policies, procedures, and resources are in place to take immediate and appropriate
steps to remedy violations of University policy and the university will take steps
to end or eliminate the hostile environment, prevent its recurrence and to remedy
the effects, as appropriate under each individual’s circumstances.
Complaints of sexual misconduct should be made directly to the Office of Equal Opportunity
Please see the Title IX Coordinator Outreach letter to learn about your specific rights to seek out Supportive Measures and options for
accountability through the OEO/AA process or through law enforcement.
UNIVERSITY TITLE IX COORDINATOR
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112Phone: 801-581-8365Fax: 801-585-5746
As defined by University Rule, R1-012: Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Misconduct
is a broad term used to encompass a range of behaviors including Sexual or Gender-Based
Harassment, Intimate Partner Violence, Sexual Exploitation, Stalking, Nonconsensual
Sexual Contact, and Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration. Sexual Misconduct also includes
the crimes of dating violence, domestic violence, sexual assault and stalking as defined
by state and federal law. Sexual Misconduct is a form of Sex Discrimination. The following
definitions of prohibited conduct apply to University policies.
Sexual or Gender-Based Harassment
As defined by University Rule, R1-012, Discrimination Complaint Rule, Sexual Harassment
means unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical
conduct of a sexual nature or based on an individual’s sex, sexual orientation, gender,
gender identity, or gender expression when:
Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition
of an individual’s employment, education, living environment, health care or participation
in a university program activity;
Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for
or a factor in decisions affecting that individual’s employment, education, living
environment, or participation in a university program or activity; or
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of interfering with an individual’s employment
or educational performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment
for that individual’s employment, education, living environment, or participation
in a university program or activity.
Consent means affirmative, unambiguous, and voluntary agreement. For a nonexhaustive
list of situations in which consent has not been given, see Utah Code Ann. 76-5-406.
means actual or threatened physical violence, intimidation, or other forms of physical
or sexual abuse that would cause a reasonable person to fear harm to self or others.
For this policy, “intimate relationship” means marriage, domestic partnership, engagement,
casual or serious romantic involvement, and dating, whether in a current or former
relationship. Intimate Partner Violence can occur between persons of any sex, sexual
orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, and it can occur in any
type of intimate relationship including monogamous, non-committed, and relationships
involving more than two partners. Intimate Partner Violence can be a single act or
a pattern of behavior. Intimate Partner Violence is sometimes referred to as, and
includes behaviors that would be considered, dating violence, domestic violence, or
relationship abuse. Examples of Intimate Partner Violence include, but are not limited
to, situations in which the following behaviors are directed toward a partner in a
current or former intimate relationship: hitting, kicking, strangling, or other violence;
property damage; and threat of violence to one’s self, one’s partner, or the family
members, friends, pets, or personal property of the partner. Intimate Partner Violence
is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
means any physical contact with another person of a sexual nature without that person’s
Consent. The touching of a person’s intimate parts (such as genitalia, groin, breast,
buttocks, mouth, or clothing covering same); touching a person with one’s own intimate
parts; or forcing a person to touch another’s intimate parts would be violations of
this policy if they occur without Consent. Nonconsensual Sexual Contact is a form
Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration
means the sexual penetration of any bodily opening with any object or body part without
Consent. This could be committed by force, threat, intimidation, or through exploitation of
another’s mental or physical condition (such as lack of consciousness, incapacitation
due to drugs or alcohol, age, or disability) of which the Respondent was actually
aware or which a reasonable person in the Respondent’s position should have been aware.
Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
means treating someone differently, i.e., disadvantaging the person, on the basis
of sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression when:
such conduct adversely affects a term or condition of an individual’s employment,
education, living environment, or participation in a University program or activity;
a person’s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity or expression is used
as the basis for or a factor in decisions affecting that individual’s employment,
education, living environment, health care, or participation in a University program
means any physical sexual act perpetrated against a person’s will or where a person
is incapable of giving consent (e.g., due to age or use of drugs or alcohol, or because
an intellectual or other disability prevents the person from having the capacity to
means engaging in a course of conduct directed at a specific person and based on that’s
person’s sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or gender expression, that
would cause a reasonable person to fear for the person’s safety or the safety of others
or suffer substantial emotional distress. Stalking is a form of Sexual Misconduct.
Discussion of issues or theories relating to sexuality or gender in an academic or
professional setting, when appropriate to subject matter, will be presumed not to
constitute sexual harassment even if it offends or embarrasses an individual unless
other factors are involved. Such factors include targeting the discussion to an individual
or carrying out the discussion in terms that are both patently unnecessary and gratuitously
Under university policy, most University employees are required to report situations
involving sexual misconduct and discrimination to the Office of Equal Opportunity
and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)
Some situations may be very personal; we respect your privacy and will protect it
in accordance with University of Utah policy and FERPA. Although information about
the situation may be reported to the OEO/AA, you have the right to choose to whom
you speak, what you say, when you say it and what resources you use. If you prefer
to speak first with a confidential resource (confidential resources are not required
to report information to the OEO/AA, you may contact one of the groups below.
Information provided to OEO/AA is considered private information and will only be shared with other appropriate university personnel on
a very strict need-to-know basis.
A collection of sites and areas containing additional information
Information about Sexual Assault Awareness & Response Support
Office of Equal Opportunity,  Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Prohibited Discrimination - Office of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
Office of Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Title IX
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Pregnancy and Pregnancy-Related Accommodations
Safety of Minors in University Programs
State and Federal Agency Resources
OEO/AA Investigation & Adjudication Process
Current Page: Prohibited Discrimination
Discrimination is partiality or bias in the treatment of a person or group that is
unfair or violates law or policy. Treating someone differently based on a protected class violates University policy. A protected class is a group of people protected against
discrimination by University policy or by state and federal law.
icon Color icon Raceicon Ethnicityicon National Originicon Ageicon Religionicon Disabilityicon Veteran Statusicon Pregnancy icon Sexicon Sexual Orientationicon Gender Identityicon Gender Expressionicon Genetic Information
Not all discrimination violates law or policy. One can be subject to unfair treatment
that does not violate University policy or state or federal law. An example would
be being treated unfairly because someone doesn’t like you or because of your political
What is Discriminatory Harassment?
The University’s nondiscrimination policy applies broadly to students, employees,
and visitors. Hostile environment is a commonly used term but from a legal and policy
perspective, a hostile environment is a form of discriminatory harassment.
Harassment means unwelcome or offensive conduct which has the purpose or effect of
interfering with an individuals’ work or academic environment or creating an intimidating
hostile, offensive or otherwise working or learning environment based upon a person’s
race, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, religion, sexual orientation,
gender identity, gender expression, or protected veteran’s status. The University’s
Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA) is responsible for the
University’s nondiscrimination policies.
Many people have heard the term “hostile environment” in the context of sexual harassment
but a “hostile environment” can also include harassment because of race, color, national
origin, age, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression and
protected veteran’s status. For harassment not related to discrimination, contact
What constitutes a hostile environment? What are the range of scenarios that people
A hostile environment can be created in many ways. Verbal comments, text messages,
pictures, graphics, graffiti and physical conduct can create a hostile environment.
This might look like racial slurs, comments about a person’s national origin, or behavior
or words that mock, demean, put down, disparage, threaten or ridicule others based
upon race, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, religion, sexual orientation,
gender identity/expression and protected veteran’s status.
An isolated statement, even if rude and offensive, generally does not constitute a
hostile environment. Occasional insensitive and off-hand comments, even if inappropriate
or unprofessional, will generally not create a hostile environment. The focus is whether
the behavior, as a whole, affecting a person’s education or working environment. In order to interfere with a person’s work or educational environment, generally
the conduct must be severe, recurring and pervasive so that it interferes with your
ability to fulfill your work and academic pursuits.
Although an occasional comment may not constitute a violation of the University’s
nondiscrimination policy, other provisions of University policy governing student
and employee conduct may apply. It is important to mention that the University, in
terms of student, visitor, and employee conduct, has an interest in preventing discrimination
and harassment. For example, if a department has an employee who tells an inappropriate
joke then other employees begin to participate in similar types of comments, believing
that such behavior is condoned, the workplace can then develop into a hostile environment
for those that find such conduct unwelcome and offensive.
If someone feels like they are experiencing a hostile environment, what options are
open to them to deal with the situation?
The first step is to tell the individual that their comments are unwelcome and unwanted.
Sometimes this may be difficult but once you have made it clear that their comments
are not welcome, the individual has clearly been notified that you find their behavior
unwelcome and offensive. Once the individual clearly understands the behavior isn’t
welcome yet continues to engage in similar behavior, disciplinary action may be appropriate.
There are many options on the University campus that can assist you in addressing
the unwanted and unwelcome behavior. The Office of the Dean of Students, Human Resources, and the Office of Equal Opportunity are all avenues that can assist you in addressing
How are issues like these handled to protect the person dealing with hostility while
also being fair to the Respondent?
The Office of Equal Opportunity is neutral and impartial whose purpose in an investigation
is to determine the facts. Both parties are provided an opportunity to provide their
side of the story. Obtaining both the perspective of the person dealing with the hostility
as well as the person alleged to have engaged in the behavior is important in terms
of treating both parties fairly. Although both parties are given an opportunity to
provide their side of the story, it is important to remember that it doesn’t matter
whether the behavior was intended to hurt the other individual. An investigation by
the Office of Equal Opportunity would look at whether a reasonable person would take
offense to the unwanted or unwelcome behavior.
University policy prohibits retaliation against an individual for having made a complaint,
testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, hearing, or
proceeding under the University’s nondiscrimination policies or for interfering with
the rights of individuals under the University’s nondiscrimination policies.
Examples of retaliation include:
demoting, disciplining, or harassing an employee because the employee files or reports
discrimination or sexual misconduct to OEO/AA
interfering with witnesses or others who may be interviewed as part of an investigation
giving a lower grade because a student does not accede to sexual advances
If you believe you have experienced discriminatory conduct, including sexual misconduct,
or retaliation, you may file a complaint with our office.
Office of Equal Opportunity,  Affirmative Action, and Title IX
383 South University Street, Level 1 OEO SuiteSalt Lake City, UT 84112801-581-8365
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Mandatory Reporters | Sexual Assault Awareness & Response Support
Select PageReportingReporting Sexual MisconductTitle IX (On-Campus) ReportingReporting to the PoliceMandatory ReportersConfidential ReportingDefinitionsGet InvolvedEducational ResourcesVolunteerStudent GroupsGet HelpMedical ResourcesCounseling & SupportHow to help a friendCrisisSecondary Survivors
Sexual Assault Awareness & Response Support
Who are responsible employees and who are campus security authorities?
Administration and staff (non-mental health)
Campus police or campus security officials
Resources for responsible employees/mandatory reporters:
Tips on how to respond if someone discloses an issue of sexual misconduct to you:
If safety is an immediate concern, call 9-1-1 or University Police at 801-585-2677.
Let the person notifying you know that you are a mandatory reporter and under university policy you are required to inform the Title IX coordinator of the incident. Let the survivor know that you and the Title IX coordinator will preserve their privacy and that they can file a complaint through Title IX (OEO/AA), if they wish.
I am required to report this information so the university can provide support for your safety and ensure you have information about your options.
A victim advocate or the Title IX coordinator will be reaching out to you. As part of that process, you have the right to choose to whom you may speak, what resources you use and what you say.
The information you share with me and the Title IX coordinator is private and will only be shared on a need-to-know basis.
Start by believing. It isn’t your job to investigate the issue. Suspend any judgement and avoid victim-blaming. Victim-blaming includes placing any portion of the blame, no matter how small, on the person who experienced the misconduct. Listen and use supportive phrases, such as, “I’m so sorry this happened to you” and “I want to help you get support through this,” etc.
Refer the survivor to campus resources such as the victim advocates, the University Counseling Center or the Women’s Resource Center. They can make sure the survivor knows exactly what resources and options are available to them after experiencing sexual misconduct. More information on resources for survivors can be found here.
Report the information to the Title IX coordinator in the Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action, 801-581-8365.
For more information on how to respond, visit these pages:
Reports of sexual misconduct are processed through the Title IX coordinator, located in the Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action. Contact the Title IX coordinator to file a report.
University of Utah Title IX Coordinator: Sherrie Hayashi Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action 201 S. President’s Circle, Room 135 Salt Lake City, UT 84112
Find more campus and community resources for survivors
24-hour hotlines for information and support | If you are in immediate crisis or feel unsafe, call 911.
201 Presidents Circle Room 201SLC UT 84112801.581.7200
Privacy Policy  |  Disclaimer  |  Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Mandatory Reporters | Sexual Assault Awareness & Response Support
Select PageReportingReporting Sexual MisconductTitle IX (On-Campus) ReportingReporting to the PoliceMandatory ReportersConfidential ReportingDefinitionsGet InvolvedEducational ResourcesVolunteerStudent GroupsGet HelpMedical ResourcesCounseling & SupportHow to help a friendCrisisSecondary Survivors
Sexual Assault Awareness & Response Support
Who are responsible employees and who are campus security authorities?
Administration and staff (non-mental health)
Campus police or campus security officials
Resources for responsible employees/mandatory reporters:
Tips on how to respond if someone discloses an issue of sexual misconduct to you:
If safety is an immediate concern, call 9-1-1 or University Police at 801-585-2677.
Let the person notifying you know that you are a mandatory reporter and under university policy you are required to inform the Title IX coordinator of the incident. Let the survivor know that you and the Title IX coordinator will preserve their privacy and that they can file a complaint through Title IX (OEO/AA), if they wish.
I am required to report this information so the university can provide support for your safety and ensure you have information about your options.
A victim advocate or the Title IX coordinator will be reaching out to you. As part of that process, you have the right to choose to whom you may speak, what resources you use and what you say.
The information you share with me and the Title IX coordinator is private and will only be shared on a need-to-know basis.
Start by believing. It isn’t your job to investigate the issue. Suspend any judgement and avoid victim-blaming. Victim-blaming includes placing any portion of the blame, no matter how small, on the person who experienced the misconduct. Listen and use supportive phrases, such as, “I’m so sorry this happened to you” and “I want to help you get support through this,” etc.
Refer the survivor to campus resources such as the victim advocates, the University Counseling Center or the Women’s Resource Center. They can make sure the survivor knows exactly what resources and options are available to them after experiencing sexual misconduct. More information on resources for survivors can be found here.
Report the information to the Title IX coordinator in the Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action, 801-581-8365.
For more information on how to respond, visit these pages:
Reports of sexual misconduct are processed through the Title IX coordinator, located in the Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action. Contact the Title IX coordinator to file a report.
University of Utah Title IX Coordinator: Sherrie Hayashi Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action 201 S. President’s Circle, Room 135 Salt Lake City, UT 84112
Find more campus and community resources for survivors
24-hour hotlines for information and support | If you are in immediate crisis or feel unsafe, call 911.
201 Presidents Circle Room 201SLC UT 84112801.581.7200
Privacy Policy  |  Disclaimer  |  Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Reporting Sexual Misconduct | Sexual Assault Awareness & Response Support
Select PageReportingReporting Sexual MisconductTitle IX (On-Campus) ReportingReporting to the PoliceMandatory ReportersConfidential ReportingDefinitionsGet InvolvedEducational ResourcesVolunteerStudent GroupsGet HelpMedical ResourcesCounseling & SupportHow to help a friendCrisisSecondary Survivors
Sexual Assault Awareness & Response Support
What happens if you file a sexual misconduct report on campus?
What happens if you file a sexual misconduct report with an officer?
Who are mandatory reporters and what are their responsibilities?
Who can I speak to confidentially and without reporting?
24-hour hotlines for information and support | If you are in immediate crisis or feel unsafe, call 911.
201 Presidents Circle Room 201SLC UT 84112801.581.7200
Privacy Policy  |  Disclaimer  |  Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Title IX (On-Campus) Reporting | Sexual Assault Awareness & Response Support
Select PageReportingReporting Sexual MisconductTitle IX (On-Campus) ReportingReporting to the PoliceMandatory ReportersConfidential ReportingDefinitionsGet InvolvedEducational ResourcesVolunteerStudent GroupsGet HelpMedical ResourcesCounseling & SupportHow to help a friendCrisisSecondary Survivors
Sexual Assault Awareness & Response Support
Submit a Title IX Complaint (Sexual Misconduct)
Title IX is a federal law that prohibits sex discrimination against all genders in educational institutions. Schools are required to ensure that campuses are free of sex discrimination and have an established procedure for handling complaints. The University of Utah has a Title IX coordinator to handle complaints of sex discrimination, including complaints of sexual assault and harassment:
Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action/Title IX
383 SOUTH UNIVERSITY STREET, LEVEL 1 OEO SUITE
What is the Title IX reporting process like?
When disclosing information to a Title IX investigator, you may be asked for a description of the incident including the date, time, location, and information about the perpetrator(s). Reports of sexual misconduct are processed through the Title IX Coordinator, who is housed in the Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA). If you or a mandatory reporter disclose information to the OEO/AA, you may be contacted to provide more information. Throughout the process, you can control the information you share and can choose to stop sharing at any point. You may also choose to file a formal complaint and proceed with an investigation or resolve the matter through informal resolution.
Supportive Measures are available to help support you, whether or not you wish to file a formal complaint with our office. Supportive measures are non-disciplinary, non-punitive individualized services offered as appropriate, as reasonably available, and without fee or charge.  If you choose, we can work with the appropriate campus office to obtain extensions of deadlines or other course-related adjustments, modifications of work or class schedules, changes in work or housing locations, leaves of absence, refer you to counseling and/or victim advocacy services, and also implement safety and protective measures, such as no-contact directives, campus escort services, increased security and monitoring of certain areas of the campus and other similar measures. You may also request one-on-one training, education, or other requests as defined by you such as asking us to tell the other party that their behavior is expected to stop.  Training may be able to be implemented anonymously but that may limit our ability to address the behavior. Supportive Measures are available, whether or not you file a Formal Complaint with OEO/AA.
Choosing to report an incident of sexual misconduct can feel empowering for a survivor. However, the reporting process can be emotionally difficult. Some students may be reluctant to report to the police. Some students may also be wary of re-victimization and re-traumatization. The survivor should have the choice of whether or not to report and continue with an investigation. Talking to a confidential resource can help a survivor decide which options are best for them.
What is the investigation/adjudication process like?
Each investigation and adjudication process is individualized, but the following is a basic outline of the Title IX process related to allegations of sexual misconduct.  Under Title IX, there are two different types of cases:  1) Sexual misconduct is a broad term used to encompass a range of behaviors. It includes Sexual or Gender-Based Harassment, Intimate Partner Violence, Sexual Exploitation, Sexual Violence, Stalking, Nonconsensual Sexual Contact, and Nonconsensual Sexual Penetration. Sexual Misconduct is a type of Sex or Gender-Based Discrimination; and 2) Discrimination - Being treated differently because of sex/gender.
After a Title IX formal complaint is filed, the complaint is assessed to determine whether or not the conduct violates the university's nondiscrimination policies. Both the complaining party (person making the complaint) and the responding party (person who is accused of misconduct) are interviewed for information regarding the complaint. Parties may have an advisor of their choice with them when being interviewed. When available, documentary evidence is reviewed, and witnesses are interviewed as well. Investigations may take up to 60 days or the parties will be informed of the reasons the investigation cannot be completed within 60 days.
1) Procedures for sexual misconduct cases:
At the conclusion of the investigation, the OEO will issue recommendations that are published in a report that is shared with both parties to the complaint. Recommendations are categorized as either “cause,” or “insufficient evidence” as to whether university policy was violated.
If the OEO recommends that there is cause to believe that university policy has been violated, recommendations for disciplinary actions (sanctions) will be made. In the case of students, the Office of the Dean of Students makes recommendations for sanctions.
After the issuance of the OEO report, a hearing will be scheduled before a three-person hearing committee.  The hearing committee will make the decision whether or not a violation of university policy has occurred. The Hearing Committee will also make the decision as to any sanctions should be imposed against the Respondent and any remedies that should be provided to the Complainant.  Parties may have one advisor and one support person of their choice present at hearings. If a party does not have an advisor, a university-appointed advisor will be appointed, without fee or charge to the party.  A university-appointed advisor cannot provide advice, including legal advice to a party.  The role of a University-appointed advisor is for the sole purpose of conducting questioning of the other party, any witnesses, and any others who have provided information as part of the investigative or hearing process.  Hearings are usually held using Zoom or other similar technology. Students and staff may appeal the decision of the hearing committee to the applicable vice president. Faculty may appeal the decisions of the hearing committee to the president.
2) Procedures for sex/gender discrimination cases:
At the conclusion of the investigation, the OEO will issue findings that are published in a report that is shared with both parties to the complaint. Recommendations are categorized as either “cause,” or “insufficient evidence” as to whether university policy was violated.
If the OEO recommends that there is cause to believe that university policy has been violated, recommendations for disciplinary actions (sanctions) will be made. In the case of students, the Office of the Dean of Students makes recommendations for sanctions.
In discrimination cases, a hearing is not automatically scheduled.  Rather, either party may request a hearing before a hearing committee.  The process is similar to a sexual misconduct hearing as described above.  Parties may choose to have one advisor and one support person; except university-provided advisors are not appointed if a party does not have an advisor of their choice.
Get More Information on the University’s Sexual Misconduct Complaint Process
Get More Information on the University’s Sexual Misconduct Complaint Process
24-hour hotlines for information and support | If you are in immediate crisis or feel unsafe, call 911.
201 Presidents Circle Room 201SLC UT 84112801.581.7200
Privacy Policy  |  Disclaimer  |  Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Sexual Assault Awareness & Response Support
Select PageReportingReporting Sexual MisconductTitle IX (On-Campus) ReportingReporting to the PoliceMandatory ReportersConfidential ReportingDefinitionsGet InvolvedEducational ResourcesVolunteerStudent GroupsGet HelpMedical ResourcesCounseling & SupportHow to help a friendCrisisSecondary Survivors
Sexual Assault Awareness & Response Support
People use a lot of different words to describe harm in relationships—intimate partner violence, interpersonal violence and domestic violence. No matter what you call it, the University of Utah is committed to ending sexual misconduct and supporting survivors. This website seeks to provide accurate and comprehensive information regarding the reporting process and available resources for students, faculty and staff.
Need immediate help? Find 24-hour resources for survivors of sexual violence here.
Find on- and off-campus resources, including counseling, advocacy, education and more.
Learn about the reporting processes on- and off-campus. Know your options for confidentiality.
Learn about the words and phrases associated with sexual misconduct.
Has someone you know been sexually assaulted? Learn about your options and how to respond.
Want to support survivors and end sexual violence? Discover how to make a difference on campus.
24-hour hotlines for information and support | If you are in immediate crisis or feel unsafe, call 911.
201 Presidents Circle Room 201SLC UT 84112801.581.7200
Privacy Policy  |  Disclaimer  |  Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
The University of Utah is committed to maintaining a professional working and learning environment for all.
THE UNIVERSITY OF UTAH IS COMMITTED TO MAINTAINING A PROFESSIONAL WORKING AND LEARNING ENVIRONMENT FOR ALL.
The Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action, which also oversees Title IX, is entrusted with protecting this environment and accomplishes this by implementing and enforcing policies on nondiscrimination. The institution’s disciplinary process is designed to:
DETERMINE IF INSTITUTIONAL POLICY HAS BEEN VIOLATED
PROVIDE RESOLUTIONS THAT EDUCATE RESPONDENTS
PROTECT INDIVIDUALS IN THE CAMPUS COMMUNITY FROM FURTHER
OEO/Title IX conducts investigations into allegations of discrimination or sexual misconduct.  When a violation of university policy has occurred, sanctions may be implemented by the appropriate sanctioning body.
Incidents reported to OEO/Title IX are generally not reported to the police (exceptions may occur when circumstances raise concerns of safety of others, including the broader campus community). Incidents reported to the University of Utah police are reported to OEO/Title IX.
Criminal and university administrative processes are independent of one another and may result in different outcomes and resolutions.
When an incident of discrimination or sexual misconduct occurs, it should be reported to OEO/Title IX. Once the office receives information about an incident, OEO/Title IX begins to review and determine how to respond to the reported incident:
REPORT OF DISCRIMINATION OR SEXUAL MISCONDUCT
When OEO/Title IX becomes aware of an incident of discrimination or sexual misconduct, the office immediately begins to explore the issue further to determine the appropriate steps to take based upon the information reported.
OEO/Title IX immediately connects individuals with information about supportive measures, resources and information about filing options, including how to file a formal complaint with OEO/AA and law enforcement, if applicable.
Upon gathering more information about the incident, OEO/Title IX will assess whether it has a duty to warn the campus community and/or take other actions, as necessary.
After an initial review, OEO/Title IX will determine whether the complaint states sufficient facts demonstrating that a violation of university policy may have occurred. If the complaint states facts that, if proven, would be a violation of the  discrimination policy, an  investigation will move forward. If not, the complaint will be dismissed.
A complaint dismissal may be appealed to the Chief Human Resources Officer for employees and students, or to the Customer Services Director for University Hospitals and Clinics when a complaint is filed by a patient, who will either agree or disagree with the initial decision. If this person disagrees with OEO/Title IX, the case will be remanded back to OEO/Title IX for investigation.
When an investigation begins, notice is provided to the person against whom the complaint is filed (the "Respondent") as well as the cognizant university vice president over the Respondent and any other university administrators who have a business need-to-know.
OEO/Title IX will interview the complainant and respondents separately, interview witnesses, gather documents, and other evidence.
Once the investigation is completed, OEO/Title IX will draft a report that is shared with the parties involved. The parties have ten (10) days to submit a response and/or additional information.
From the time a complaint is accepted for investigation to the time the report is drafted, OEO/Title IX will endeavor to complete the investigation within 60 calendar days.
In cases alleging Sexual Misconduct, OEO will issue a recommendation of whether or not a policy violation has occurred.  The determination about whether a policy was violated will be determined in a hearing (see Hearing).
In cases alleging other types of discrimination, OEO will issue a finding of whether or not a policy violation has occurred.
Findings and/or recommendations are shared with the Complainant, Respondent(s), the cognizant vice president over the Respondent(s), and may also be shared with Human Resources, Office for Faculty, and/or the Office of the Dean of Students.
The OEO report will have one of two outcomes:
CAUSE - this means that OEO has made a finding or a recommendation that a violation of the university's nondiscrimination policy HAS occurred.
INSUFFICIENT EVIDENCE - this means that OEO has made a finding or a recommendation that a policy of the university's nondiscrimination policy has NOT occurred.
In cases alleging sexual misconduct, the case automatically is scheduled for a hearing before a hearing committee.
In cases alleging other types of discrimination, if either party is dissatisfied with the outcome of the OEO/Title IX report, they may request a hearing within five days of the issuance of the OEO Report. If no hearing is requested, the process concludes and the OEO Report becomes the final decision of the University.
In discrimination cases that result in a finding of "insufficient evidence," the hearing Committee will first review the OEO/Title IX report and accompanying evidence to determine whether a hearing should be held.
The Committee is composed of a three-person panel, which includes a committee Chair.
Discrimination cases that result in a "cause" finding and all cases alleging sexual misconduct, do not involve an initial review and instead move directly to the hearing.
A hearing will be convened with notice given to both parties of the time, date, and location of the hearing.  Generally, hearings will be held using technology allowing all parties to simultaneously see and hear the party or the witness answering questions. Each party may be accompanied by an advisor of their choice, which may be an attorney, and also may also be accompanied by one support person of their choice.  If a party does not have an advisor, the University will provide an advisor for the limited purpose of conducting cross examination of the other party and any witnesses.  Each party will be permitted up to 45 minutes for opening statements, and extensions of time may be granted by the Chair of the Hearing Committee. Each party may also call witnesses and provide documents and other evidence.
Within 10 days of the hearing, the committee will issue its decision whether there is 'cause' or 'insufficient evidence' to show that a violation of policy has occurred.
If either party disagrees with the decision of the Hearing Committee, they may submit an appeal within five days.
If a timely appeal is not received, the decision becomes final.
If the decision of the Hearing Committee is appealed, the appeal goes to the cognizant Vice President or Designee, or in cases involving a faculty member, the appeal goes to the President or designee.  The decision is the final outcome by the university.
The University provides equitable resources and campus services to all parties involved. When an incident is brought to the attention of OEO/Title IX, Complainants (those who have experienced discrimination or sexual misconduct) and Respondents (those alleged to have engaged in discrimination or sexual misconduct) have access to a variety of resources and supportive measures aimed at protecting safety and minimizing disruption to academic pursuits. These are available regardless of whether or not a complaint is filed or of the resulting outcomes.
Lesbian Gay Bisexual Transgender Resource Center
3245 Eccles Institute of Human Genetics Office
Health Sciences Education Building Fifth Floor, Suite 5515
A. Ray Olpin Student Union Building, Room 270
Identifying information is not required to submit this form. However, this limits the ability of the office to respond.
Privacy Statement - The University of Utah
The University of Utah has created this statement to demonstrate our firm commitment
to your privacy. This document explains how we gather, use, and protect your information.
While using this site, you may choose to submit personal information through email
or online forms. We will use this information to process your requests. But we will
not intentionally sell, share, or distribute your personal information to third parties,
except as required by law or university policy.
Please be aware of the University’s GDPR Privacy Notice that supplements this Privacy
Statement. The GDPR Privacy Notice applies generally to the provision of personal
information by individuals in the European Economic Area. The GDPR Privacy Notice
explains how we meet our obligations under the European Union General Data Protection
Regulation with respect to such information. The GDPR Privacy Notice can be found
at https://www.utah.edu/privacy/gdpr.php.
The University uses reporting programs to collect data about visitor traffic to our
site. We do not attempt to personally identify visitors. Instead we collect data to
analyze in aggregate to determine trends and improve our sites. Here are some examples
of the types of data we routinely collect:
Some U sites require the use of cookies (bits of data passed by your browser to our
site). For instance, the My.Utah.edu portal uses cookies (active only during your
session) to remember password and menu settings. You are not required to use My.Utah.edu;
this tool is provided for your convenience. If you prefer not to receive cookies,
you can turn them off in your browser or set your browser to ask you before accepting
We have put in place appropriate physical, electronic, and managerial procedures to
safeguard and help prevent unauthorized access, to assist in maintaining data security,
and to assist in correctly using the information we collect online. We do not intentionally
release personal information gleaned from these programs to others, except as required
Although we make every effort to secure our networks, the University cannot guarantee
privacy of online communications. Use discretion in providing information in online
classes, chatrooms, or other open forums on the Web. If you use My.Utah.edu to access
personal records, be sure to "lock up" when you leave by exiting the site AND closing
your browser. Otherwise, the next person to use the computer may see your information.
You have a choice about whether to provide personal information online. For other
options, contact the site manager and learn how you can provide information by phone,
This site contains links to other independently managed U sites. Some may use information
for purposes other than stated above; be sure to read their separate privacy statements.
U sites also contain links to sites outside the university; these sites may have their
own privacy statement--or none at all. We urge you to exercise caution when providing
personal data to any site. Check their policies and contact them if you have questions.
We encourage parents to explore our website with their children. If we learn that
a child under age 13 has provided personally identifiable information to our sites,
we will promptly remove this from our files. For more on children's privacy rights,
read about the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act at the FTC's website.
Here's how to review or change your personal profile information (address, home phone,
On the Web – Log in to the Campus Information Services and click your address, phone, or email to edit.
In Person – Visit Registration Service Window #13 on the 2nd floor of the Student Services Building.
By Phone – Call the Registration Division (801) 581-8969.
Policies & Procedures 1-12 U Institutional Data Management Policy
Policies & Procedures 1-15 U Information Resources Policy
Policies & Procedures 1-16 U World Wide Web Resources Policy
The University, and those who work, teach, and learn here, value the privacy of the
health information you provide us. The Information Security and Privacy Office website explains how we handle the personal information that you share with us as
a patient, health/benefits plan member, or participant in a research study. The website
also provides information explaining the rights you have regarding that information
and how to exercise those rights. We provide the notices to make you aware of these
practices and to comply with the law, including the Health Insurance Portability and
University policies are subject to change. We encourage you to check back for updates
from time to time. If you have additional questions about this privacy statement,
University Webmaster 101 South Wasatch Drive #215 Salt Lake City, UT 84112 (801) 585-7320webmaster@utah.edu
201 Presidents Circle Salt Lake City, UT 84112 801.581.7200
Nondiscrimination Statement - The University of Utah
Current Page: Nondiscrimination Statement
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility Statement
The University of Utah does not discriminate on the basis of race, ethnicity, color,
religion, national origin, sex, pregnancy, pregnancy-related conditions, age, disability,
sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, genetic information or protected
veteran’s status, in employment, treatment, admission, access to educational programs
and activities, or other University benefits or services.
The University does not discriminate on the basis of sex in the education program
or activity that it operates, as required by Title IX and 34 CFR part 106.  The requirement
not to discriminate in education programs or activities extends to admission and employment.
Inquiries about the application of Title IX and its regulations may be referred to
the Title IX Coordinator, to the Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights,
Additionally, the University endeavors to provide reasonable accommodations and to
ensure equal access to qualified persons with disabilities. Click here to request a reasonable accommodation.
Where discrimination is found to have occurred, the University will take reasonable
steps to investigate the matter, stop the harassment, prevent its recurrence and remedy
If you or someone you know has experienced discrimination, sexual misconduct including
sexual harassment, or disability discrimination, we encourage you to report it to
the University's designated and authorized Title IX/ADA/Section 504 Coordinator in
the Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action:
Sherrie Hayashi, DirectorTitle IX/ADA/Section 504 CoordinatorOffice of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)201 South Presidents Circle, Rm.135 Salt Lake City, UT, 84112801-581-8365 801-585-5746 (fax)oeo@utah.eduwww.oeo.utah.eduOnline reports may be submitted at oeo.utah.edu
To file a formal complaint of discrimination, sexual misconduct (including sexual
harassment or violence), or retaliation, under University of Utah Non-Discrimination
Policy, contact the OEO/AA.   A formal complaint may be filed with the OEO/AA in person,
A Formal Complaint of Sex or Gender-Based Harassment within the scope of Title IX
is timely if at the time of filing a Formal Complaint, the Complainant is participating
in or attempting to participate in a University Program.
A Formal Complaint alleging any other type of Sexual Misconduct, or other type of
Discrimination is timely if filed within 180 calendar days of the last alleged discriminatory
A Formal Complaint of Retaliation is timey filed if filed within 180 days of the last
A Formal Complaint not filed within the appropriate time period above will be dismissed
as untimely filed; however, at the Director's discretion and for good cause, the complaint
may be accepted as if filed within the appropriate time period.
University of UtahOffice of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)201 S. Presidents Circle, Room 135Salt Lake City, UT  84112Telephone: 801-581-8365Fax: 801-585-5746oeo@utah.eduwww.oeo.utah.eduOnline reports may be submitted at oeo.utah.edu
For specific information related to University Policy, please see:
regulations.utah.edu/general/1-012.phpregulations.utah.edu/general/1-011.php
EXTERNAL AGENCIES:  Filing a complaint with the University of Utah’s Title IX/504/ADA Coordinator (or
designee) does not prevent an individual from filing a complaint with an appropriate
regulatory agency. To file a complaint regarding discrimination, including sexual
harassment, or retaliation with a regulatory state or federal agency, please see the
agency information below.  For information about the time frames in which complaints
must be filed, please contact the relevant agency.
Education: Complaints regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title IX of the Education
Amendments of 1972, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Title II of the
Americans with Disabilities Act, Age Discrimination Act of 1975.
United States Department of EducationOffice for Civil Rights– Region VIIICesar E. Chavez Memorial Building1244 Speer Boulevard, Suite 310Denver, Colorado 80204-3582Telephone: 303-844-5695FAX: 303-844-4303
Online complaint portal: http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/docs/howto.htmlwww2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/index.html
Employment:State Agency:  Individual complaints regarding: Utah Anti-Discrimination Act of 1965,
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, Age Discrimination in Employment
Act of 1967, as amended, and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. Utah Anti-Discrimination and Labor Division (UALD)160 East 300 South, 3rd floorP.O. Box 146630Salt Lake City, Utah 84114-6630Telephone: 801-530-6801www.laborcommission.utah.gov
Federal Agencies:Complaints regarding: Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, The Pregnancy Discrimination
Act, Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, as amended (ADEA), Equal Pay Act
of 1963, Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act of 2008, Sections
501 and 505 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and Section 102 and 103 of the Civil
Rights Act of 1991, the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 (GINA) Equal Employment Opportunity CommissionPhoenix District Office3300 North Central Avenue, Suite 690Phoenix, AZ 85012Telephone: 1-800-669-4000TTY:  1-800-669-6820Fax: 602-640-5071www.eeoc.gov U.S. Department of LaborOffice of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP)Denver District Office1244 Speer Blvd, Suite 540Denver, CO 80204Phone 720-264-3200Fax:  720-264-3211https://www.dol.gov/ofccp/index.htm Executive Order 11246 (Equal Employment and Affirmative Action)Americans with Disability Act Amendments Act, of 2008Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 197338 USC 4212 – The Vietnam Era Veterans’ Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974Uniformed Service Employment and Re-employment Rights Act (USERRA)Online complaint portal:www.dol.gov/elaws/vets/userra/ee_disc.asp Veteran’s Employment and Training Service140 East 300 South, Room 209Salt Lake City, UT 84111Telephone: 801-526-0950jobs.utah.gov/jobseeker/veterans/employtrain.html
Housing (Residents of dorms and family student housing)State Agency:  Complaints regarding: Utah Fair Housing Act of 1993, as amended.
Utah Anti-Discrimination and Labor Division (UALD)160 East 300 South, 3rd floorSalt Lake City, Utah 84114-6630Telephone: 801-530-6801www.laborcommission.utah.gov Federal Agency:  U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”) Complaints
regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, Title VIII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1968 (Fair Housing Act), Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Action
of 1973, as amended, Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, Age
Discrimination Act of 1975, Title IX of the Education Amendments Act, and Architectural
Barriers Act of 1968. U.S. Department of Housing & Urban Development (HUD)1670 Broadway, 25th floorDenver, Colorado 80202-4801Telephone: (303)672-5440Fax: (303)672-5004Online complaint portal: https://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/topics/housing_discrimination Health care, human services, and health insurance plans (Patients and Participants):  Complaints regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, Title
II of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and the Community Service Assurance
provisions of the Hill-Burton Act U.S. Department of Health & Human ServicesOffice for Civil Rights, DHHS – Region VIII1961 Stout Street Room 08-148Denver, CO 80294Customer Response Center 1-800-368-1019TDD:  1-800-537-7697Email: Ocrmail@hhs.govOnline complaint portal: https://ocrportal.hhs.gov/ocr/smartscreen/main.jsfWebsite: www.hhs.gov/ocrCampus Accessibility Website: https://accessibility.utah.edu
201 Presidents Circle Salt Lake City, UT 84112 801.581.7200
Privacy Statement - The University of Utah
The University of Utah has created this statement to demonstrate our firm commitment
to your privacy. This document explains how we gather, use, and protect your information.
While using this site, you may choose to submit personal information through email
or online forms. We will use this information to process your requests. But we will
not intentionally sell, share, or distribute your personal information to third parties,
except as required by law or university policy.
Please be aware of the University’s GDPR Privacy Notice that supplements this Privacy
Statement. The GDPR Privacy Notice applies generally to the provision of personal
information by individuals in the European Economic Area. The GDPR Privacy Notice
explains how we meet our obligations under the European Union General Data Protection
Regulation with respect to such information. The GDPR Privacy Notice can be found
at https://www.utah.edu/privacy/gdpr.php.
The University uses reporting programs to collect data about visitor traffic to our
site. We do not attempt to personally identify visitors. Instead we collect data to
analyze in aggregate to determine trends and improve our sites. Here are some examples
of the types of data we routinely collect:
Some U sites require the use of cookies (bits of data passed by your browser to our
site). For instance, the My.Utah.edu portal uses cookies (active only during your
session) to remember password and menu settings. You are not required to use My.Utah.edu;
this tool is provided for your convenience. If you prefer not to receive cookies,
you can turn them off in your browser or set your browser to ask you before accepting
We have put in place appropriate physical, electronic, and managerial procedures to
safeguard and help prevent unauthorized access, to assist in maintaining data security,
and to assist in correctly using the information we collect online. We do not intentionally
release personal information gleaned from these programs to others, except as required
Although we make every effort to secure our networks, the University cannot guarantee
privacy of online communications. Use discretion in providing information in online
classes, chatrooms, or other open forums on the Web. If you use My.Utah.edu to access
personal records, be sure to "lock up" when you leave by exiting the site AND closing
your browser. Otherwise, the next person to use the computer may see your information.
You have a choice about whether to provide personal information online. For other
options, contact the site manager and learn how you can provide information by phone,
This site contains links to other independently managed U sites. Some may use information
for purposes other than stated above; be sure to read their separate privacy statements.
U sites also contain links to sites outside the university; these sites may have their
own privacy statement--or none at all. We urge you to exercise caution when providing
personal data to any site. Check their policies and contact them if you have questions.
We encourage parents to explore our website with their children. If we learn that
a child under age 13 has provided personally identifiable information to our sites,
we will promptly remove this from our files. For more on children's privacy rights,
read about the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act at the FTC's website.
Here's how to review or change your personal profile information (address, home phone,
On the Web – Log in to the Campus Information Services and click your address, phone, or email to edit.
In Person – Visit Registration Service Window #13 on the 2nd floor of the Student Services Building.
By Phone – Call the Registration Division (801) 581-8969.
Policies & Procedures 1-12 U Institutional Data Management Policy
Policies & Procedures 1-15 U Information Resources Policy
Policies & Procedures 1-16 U World Wide Web Resources Policy
The University, and those who work, teach, and learn here, value the privacy of the
health information you provide us. The Information Security and Privacy Office website explains how we handle the personal information that you share with us as
a patient, health/benefits plan member, or participant in a research study. The website
also provides information explaining the rights you have regarding that information
and how to exercise those rights. We provide the notices to make you aware of these
practices and to comply with the law, including the Health Insurance Portability and
University policies are subject to change. We encourage you to check back for updates
from time to time. If you have additional questions about this privacy statement,
University Webmaster 101 South Wasatch Drive #215 Salt Lake City, UT 84112 (801) 585-7320webmaster@utah.edu
201 Presidents Circle Salt Lake City, UT 84112 801.581.7200
Nondiscrimination Statement - The University of Utah
Current Page: Nondiscrimination Statement
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility Statement
The University of Utah does not discriminate on the basis of race, ethnicity, color,
religion, national origin, sex, pregnancy, pregnancy-related conditions, age, disability,
sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, genetic information or protected
veteran’s status, in employment, treatment, admission, access to educational programs
and activities, or other University benefits or services.
The University does not discriminate on the basis of sex in the education program
or activity that it operates, as required by Title IX and 34 CFR part 106.  The requirement
not to discriminate in education programs or activities extends to admission and employment.
Inquiries about the application of Title IX and its regulations may be referred to
the Title IX Coordinator, to the Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights,
Additionally, the University endeavors to provide reasonable accommodations and to
ensure equal access to qualified persons with disabilities. Click here to request a reasonable accommodation.
Where discrimination is found to have occurred, the University will take reasonable
steps to investigate the matter, stop the harassment, prevent its recurrence and remedy
If you or someone you know has experienced discrimination, sexual misconduct including
sexual harassment, or disability discrimination, we encourage you to report it to
the University's designated and authorized Title IX/ADA/Section 504 Coordinator in
the Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action:
Sherrie Hayashi, DirectorTitle IX/ADA/Section 504 CoordinatorOffice of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)201 South Presidents Circle, Rm.135 Salt Lake City, UT, 84112801-581-8365 801-585-5746 (fax)oeo@utah.eduwww.oeo.utah.eduOnline reports may be submitted at oeo.utah.edu
To file a formal complaint of discrimination, sexual misconduct (including sexual
harassment or violence), or retaliation, under University of Utah Non-Discrimination
Policy, contact the OEO/AA.   A formal complaint may be filed with the OEO/AA in person,
A Formal Complaint of Sex or Gender-Based Harassment within the scope of Title IX
is timely if at the time of filing a Formal Complaint, the Complainant is participating
in or attempting to participate in a University Program.
A Formal Complaint alleging any other type of Sexual Misconduct, or other type of
Discrimination is timely if filed within 180 calendar days of the last alleged discriminatory
A Formal Complaint of Retaliation is timey filed if filed within 180 days of the last
A Formal Complaint not filed within the appropriate time period above will be dismissed
as untimely filed; however, at the Director's discretion and for good cause, the complaint
may be accepted as if filed within the appropriate time period.
University of UtahOffice of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)201 S. Presidents Circle, Room 135Salt Lake City, UT  84112Telephone: 801-581-8365Fax: 801-585-5746oeo@utah.eduwww.oeo.utah.eduOnline reports may be submitted at oeo.utah.edu
For specific information related to University Policy, please see:
regulations.utah.edu/general/1-012.phpregulations.utah.edu/general/1-011.php
EXTERNAL AGENCIES:  Filing a complaint with the University of Utah’s Title IX/504/ADA Coordinator (or
designee) does not prevent an individual from filing a complaint with an appropriate
regulatory agency. To file a complaint regarding discrimination, including sexual
harassment, or retaliation with a regulatory state or federal agency, please see the
agency information below.  For information about the time frames in which complaints
must be filed, please contact the relevant agency.
Education: Complaints regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title IX of the Education
Amendments of 1972, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Title II of the
Americans with Disabilities Act, Age Discrimination Act of 1975.
United States Department of EducationOffice for Civil Rights– Region VIIICesar E. Chavez Memorial Building1244 Speer Boulevard, Suite 310Denver, Colorado 80204-3582Telephone: 303-844-5695FAX: 303-844-4303
Online complaint portal: http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/docs/howto.htmlwww2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/index.html
Employment:State Agency:  Individual complaints regarding: Utah Anti-Discrimination Act of 1965,
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, Age Discrimination in Employment
Act of 1967, as amended, and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. Utah Anti-Discrimination and Labor Division (UALD)160 East 300 South, 3rd floorP.O. Box 146630Salt Lake City, Utah 84114-6630Telephone: 801-530-6801www.laborcommission.utah.gov
Federal Agencies:Complaints regarding: Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, The Pregnancy Discrimination
Act, Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, as amended (ADEA), Equal Pay Act
of 1963, Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act of 2008, Sections
501 and 505 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and Section 102 and 103 of the Civil
Rights Act of 1991, the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 (GINA) Equal Employment Opportunity CommissionPhoenix District Office3300 North Central Avenue, Suite 690Phoenix, AZ 85012Telephone: 1-800-669-4000TTY:  1-800-669-6820Fax: 602-640-5071www.eeoc.gov U.S. Department of LaborOffice of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP)Denver District Office1244 Speer Blvd, Suite 540Denver, CO 80204Phone 720-264-3200Fax:  720-264-3211https://www.dol.gov/ofccp/index.htm Executive Order 11246 (Equal Employment and Affirmative Action)Americans with Disability Act Amendments Act, of 2008Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 197338 USC 4212 – The Vietnam Era Veterans’ Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974Uniformed Service Employment and Re-employment Rights Act (USERRA)Online complaint portal:www.dol.gov/elaws/vets/userra/ee_disc.asp Veteran’s Employment and Training Service140 East 300 South, Room 209Salt Lake City, UT 84111Telephone: 801-526-0950jobs.utah.gov/jobseeker/veterans/employtrain.html
Housing (Residents of dorms and family student housing)State Agency:  Complaints regarding: Utah Fair Housing Act of 1993, as amended.
Utah Anti-Discrimination and Labor Division (UALD)160 East 300 South, 3rd floorSalt Lake City, Utah 84114-6630Telephone: 801-530-6801www.laborcommission.utah.gov Federal Agency:  U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”) Complaints
regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, Title VIII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1968 (Fair Housing Act), Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Action
of 1973, as amended, Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, Age
Discrimination Act of 1975, Title IX of the Education Amendments Act, and Architectural
Barriers Act of 1968. U.S. Department of Housing & Urban Development (HUD)1670 Broadway, 25th floorDenver, Colorado 80202-4801Telephone: (303)672-5440Fax: (303)672-5004Online complaint portal: https://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/topics/housing_discrimination Health care, human services, and health insurance plans (Patients and Participants):  Complaints regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, Title
II of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and the Community Service Assurance
provisions of the Hill-Burton Act U.S. Department of Health & Human ServicesOffice for Civil Rights, DHHS – Region VIII1961 Stout Street Room 08-148Denver, CO 80294Customer Response Center 1-800-368-1019TDD:  1-800-537-7697Email: Ocrmail@hhs.govOnline complaint portal: https://ocrportal.hhs.gov/ocr/smartscreen/main.jsfWebsite: www.hhs.gov/ocrCampus Accessibility Website: https://accessibility.utah.edu
201 Presidents Circle Salt Lake City, UT 84112 801.581.7200
Title IX - Department of Special Education - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
The University of Utah
University of Utah Health
Department of Special Education
Bachelor's DegreeSpecializations
Preschool/Early Intervention
Deaf & Hard of Hearing
Graduate DegreesMasters Specializations
Preschool/Early Intervention
Applied Behavior Analysis
Deaf & Hard of Hearing
License & Endorsement
License EndorsementsEndorsement Specializations
Preschool/Early Intervention
Behavioral Analyst Credential
Deaf & Hard of Hearing
Graduation Application
Financial Aid & Scholarships
Student Handbook & Policies
Student Council for Exceptional Children
Student Advisory Committee
1st Year & Transfer Orientation
Multi-University Consortium
Graduation Application
Financial Aid & Scholarships
Undergraduate Tuition & Fees
Graduate Tuition & Fees
Student Handbooks & Policies
Student Council for Exceptional Children
Student Advisory Committee
1st Year & Transfer Orientation
Multi-University Consortium
Preschool/Early Intervention
Deaf & Hard of Hearing
Preschool/Early Intervention
Applied Behavior Analysis
Deaf & Hard of Hearing
License & Endorsement
Mild/Moderate Disabilities
Preschool & Early Intervention
Deaf & Hard of Hearing
Department of Special Education
Current Page: Title IX
Title IX is a federal law that prohibits sex discrimination against all genders in
educational institutions. Schools are required to ensure that campuses are free of
sex discrimination and have an established procedure for handling complaints. The
University of Utah has a Title IX coordinator to handle complaints of sex discrimination,
including complaints of sexual assault and harassment: Sherrie Hayashi, Title IX coordinator,
Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action/Title IX, Park Building, Room 135,
801-581-8365, sherrie.hayashi@utah.edu. The College of Education representative, Breda O'Keeffe, can also be contacted at
breda.okeeffe@utah.edu.
Further information on Title IX can be found here.  Title IX on-campus reporting of sexual misconduct or assault can be found here.
Department of Special Education
1721 Campus Center Drive SAEC 2280SLC, UT 84112801-581-8121
Faculty Activity Report
© 2023 The University of Utah
Indigenous Land Acknowledgment
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Credits & Attributions
Last Updated: 3/21/23
Title IX - Department of Special Education - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
The University of Utah
University of Utah Health
Department of Special Education
Bachelor's DegreeSpecializations
Preschool/Early Intervention
Deaf & Hard of Hearing
Graduate DegreesMasters Specializations
Preschool/Early Intervention
Applied Behavior Analysis
Deaf & Hard of Hearing
License & Endorsement
License EndorsementsEndorsement Specializations
Preschool/Early Intervention
Behavioral Analyst Credential
Deaf & Hard of Hearing
Graduation Application
Financial Aid & Scholarships
Student Handbook & Policies
Student Council for Exceptional Children
Student Advisory Committee
1st Year & Transfer Orientation
Multi-University Consortium
Graduation Application
Financial Aid & Scholarships
Undergraduate Tuition & Fees
Graduate Tuition & Fees
Student Handbooks & Policies
Student Council for Exceptional Children
Student Advisory Committee
1st Year & Transfer Orientation
Multi-University Consortium
Preschool/Early Intervention
Deaf & Hard of Hearing
Preschool/Early Intervention
Applied Behavior Analysis
Deaf & Hard of Hearing
License & Endorsement
Mild/Moderate Disabilities
Preschool & Early Intervention
Deaf & Hard of Hearing
Department of Special Education
Current Page: Title IX
Title IX is a federal law that prohibits sex discrimination against all genders in
educational institutions. Schools are required to ensure that campuses are free of
sex discrimination and have an established procedure for handling complaints. The
University of Utah has a Title IX coordinator to handle complaints of sex discrimination,
including complaints of sexual assault and harassment: Sherrie Hayashi, Title IX coordinator,
Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action/Title IX, Park Building, Room 135,
801-581-8365, sherrie.hayashi@utah.edu. The College of Education representative, Breda O'Keeffe, can also be contacted at
breda.okeeffe@utah.edu.
Further information on Title IX can be found here.  Title IX on-campus reporting of sexual misconduct or assault can be found here.
Department of Special Education
1721 Campus Center Drive SAEC 2280SLC, UT 84112801-581-8121
Faculty Activity Report
© 2023 The University of Utah
Indigenous Land Acknowledgment
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Credits & Attributions
Last Updated: 3/21/23
Nondiscrimination Statement - The University of Utah
University of Utah COVID-19 Updates
The University of Utah
International Students
Financial Aid & Scholarships
New Student Orientation
Student Leadership & Involvement
Catalogs, Schedules & Calendar
Colleges & Departments
International Students
Financial Aid & Scholarships
New Student Orientation
Student Leadership & Involvement
Catalogs, Schedules & Calendar
Colleges & Departments
Current Page: Nondiscrimination Statement
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility Statement
The University of Utah does not discriminate on the basis of race, ethnicity, color,
religion, national origin, sex, pregnancy, pregnancy-related conditions, age, disability,
sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, genetic information or protected
veteran’s status, in employment, treatment, admission, access to educational programs
and activities, or other University benefits or services.
The University does not discriminate on the basis of sex in the education program
or activity that it operates, as required by Title IX and 34 CFR part 106.  The requirement
not to discriminate in education programs or activities extends to admission and employment.
Inquiries about the application of Title IX and its regulations may be referred to
the Title IX Coordinator, to the Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights,
Additionally, the University endeavors to provide reasonable accommodations and to
ensure equal access to qualified persons with disabilities. Click here to request a reasonable accommodation.
Where discrimination is found to have occurred, the University will take reasonable
steps to investigate the matter, stop the harassment, prevent its recurrence and remedy
If you or someone you know has experienced discrimination, sexual misconduct including
sexual harassment, or disability discrimination, we encourage you to report it to
the University's designated and authorized Title IX/ADA/Section 504 Coordinator in
the Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action:
Sherrie Hayashi, DirectorTitle IX/ADA/Section 504 CoordinatorOffice of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)201 South Presidents Circle, Rm.135 Salt Lake City, UT, 84112801-581-8365 801-585-5746 (fax)oeo@utah.eduwww.oeo.utah.eduOnline reports may be submitted at oeo.utah.edu
NOTICE OF FILING OPTIONS
To file a formal complaint of discrimination, sexual misconduct (including sexual
harassment or violence), or retaliation, under University of Utah Non-Discrimination
Policy, contact the OEO/AA.   A formal complaint may be filed with the OEO/AA in person,
by mail, or by electronic mail.
A Formal Complaint of Sex or Gender-Based Harassment within the scope of Title IX
is timely if at the time of filing a Formal Complaint, the Complainant is participating
in or attempting to participate in a University Program.
A Formal Complaint alleging any other type of Sexual Misconduct, or other type of
Discrimination is timely if filed within 180 calendar days of the last alleged discriminatory
A Formal Complaint of Retaliation is timey filed if filed within 180 days of the last
alleged retaliatory act.
A Formal Complaint not filed within the appropriate time period above will be dismissed
as untimely filed; however, at the Director's discretion and for good cause, the complaint
may be accepted as if filed within the appropriate time period.
University of UtahOffice of Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action (OEO/AA)201 S. Presidents Circle, Room 135Salt Lake City, UT  84112Telephone: 801-581-8365Fax: 801-585-5746oeo@utah.eduwww.oeo.utah.eduOnline reports may be submitted at oeo.utah.edu
For specific information related to University Policy, please see:
regulations.utah.edu/general/1-012.phpregulations.utah.edu/general/1-011.php
EXTERNAL AGENCIES:  Filing a complaint with the University of Utah’s Title IX/504/ADA Coordinator (or
designee) does not prevent an individual from filing a complaint with an appropriate
regulatory agency. To file a complaint regarding discrimination, including sexual
harassment, or retaliation with a regulatory state or federal agency, please see the
agency information below.  For information about the time frames in which complaints
must be filed, please contact the relevant agency.
Education: Complaints regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title IX of the Education
Amendments of 1972, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Title II of the
Americans with Disabilities Act, Age Discrimination Act of 1975.
United States Department of EducationOffice for Civil Rights– Region VIIICesar E. Chavez Memorial Building1244 Speer Boulevard, Suite 310Denver, Colorado 80204-3582Telephone: 303-844-5695FAX: 303-844-4303
Online complaint portal: http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/docs/howto.htmlwww2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/index.html
Employment:State Agency:  Individual complaints regarding: Utah Anti-Discrimination Act of 1965,
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, Age Discrimination in Employment
Act of 1967, as amended, and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. Utah Anti-Discrimination and Labor Division (UALD)160 East 300 South, 3rd floorP.O. Box 146630Salt Lake City, Utah 84114-6630Telephone: 801-530-6801www.laborcommission.utah.gov
Federal Agencies:Complaints regarding: Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, The Pregnancy Discrimination
Act, Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, as amended (ADEA), Equal Pay Act
of 1963, Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act of 2008, Sections
501 and 505 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and Section 102 and 103 of the Civil
Rights Act of 1991, the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 (GINA) Equal Employment Opportunity CommissionPhoenix District Office3300 North Central Avenue, Suite 690Phoenix, AZ 85012Telephone: 1-800-669-4000TTY:  1-800-669-6820Fax: 602-640-5071www.eeoc.gov U.S. Department of LaborOffice of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP)Denver District Office1244 Speer Blvd, Suite 540Denver, CO 80204Phone 720-264-3200Fax:  720-264-3211https://www.dol.gov/ofccp/index.htm Executive Order 11246 (Equal Employment and Affirmative Action)Americans with Disability Act Amendments Act, of 2008Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 197338 USC 4212 – The Vietnam Era Veterans’ Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974Uniformed Service Employment and Re-employment Rights Act (USERRA)Online complaint portal:www.dol.gov/elaws/vets/userra/ee_disc.asp Veteran’s Employment and Training Service140 East 300 South, Room 209Salt Lake City, UT 84111Telephone: 801-526-0950jobs.utah.gov/jobseeker/veterans/employtrain.html
Housing (Residents of dorms and family student housing)State Agency:  Complaints regarding: Utah Fair Housing Act of 1993, as amended.
Utah Anti-Discrimination and Labor Division (UALD)160 East 300 South, 3rd floorSalt Lake City, Utah 84114-6630Telephone: 801-530-6801www.laborcommission.utah.gov Federal Agency:  U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”) Complaints
regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, Title VIII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1968 (Fair Housing Act), Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Action
of 1973, as amended, Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, Age
Discrimination Act of 1975, Title IX of the Education Amendments Act, and Architectural
Barriers Act of 1968. U.S. Department of Housing & Urban Development (HUD)1670 Broadway, 25th floorDenver, Colorado 80202-4801Telephone: (303)672-5440Fax: (303)672-5004Online complaint portal: https://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/topics/housing_discrimination Health care, human services, and health insurance plans (Patients and Participants):  Complaints regarding: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, Title
II of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and the Community Service Assurance
provisions of the Hill-Burton Act U.S. Department of Health & Human ServicesOffice for Civil Rights, DHHS – Region VIII1961 Stout Street Room 08-148Denver, CO 80294Customer Response Center 1-800-368-1019TDD:  1-800-537-7697Email: Ocrmail@hhs.govOnline complaint portal: https://ocrportal.hhs.gov/ocr/smartscreen/main.jsfWebsite: www.hhs.gov/ocrCampus Accessibility Website: https://accessibility.utah.edu
The University of Utah
201 Presidents Circle Salt Lake City, UT 84112 801.581.7200
Equity, Diversity & Inclusion
Office of the President
© 2023 The University of Utah
Indigenous Land Acknowledgment
Nondiscrimination & Accessibility
Credits & Attributions
