Title IX, Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action | Help@UCR
Who to contact:Title IX, Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action 951-827-7070titleix@ucr.eduTitle IX, Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action is responsible for ensuring UCR's commitment to non-discrimination, equal employment and affirmative action.  The Office can answer questions about policy and receive complaints and reports of bias, hate, and all forms of discrimination and harassment including sexual violence. The Office enforces the UC Policy on Sexual Violence and Sexual Harassment and UCR's Discrimination, Harassment and Retaliation Complaint and Resolution Policy. To file a report online: i-Sight | UC Incident Reporting Form for Harassment and Discrimination   (note reports may be filed anonymously)
Title IX, Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action | Help@UCR
Who to contact:Title IX, Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action 951-827-7070titleix@ucr.eduTitle IX, Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action is responsible for ensuring UCR's commitment to non-discrimination, equal employment and affirmative action.  The Office can answer questions about policy and receive complaints and reports of bias, hate, and all forms of discrimination and harassment including sexual violence. The Office enforces the UC Policy on Sexual Violence and Sexual Harassment and UCR's Discrimination, Harassment and Retaliation Complaint and Resolution Policy. To file a report online: i-Sight | UC Incident Reporting Form for Harassment and Discrimination   (note reports may be filed anonymously)
Office of Title IX, Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action | Compliance
Office of Title IX, Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action
Office of Title IX, Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action
Office of Title IX, Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action
Office of Title IX, Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action
The University is committed to non-discrimination, equal employment and affirmative action.  UCR respects the rights of all members of the campus community to equal opportunity  and freedom from harassment on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, citizenship, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender (including gender identity, gender expression and gender transition status), pregnancy, age, disability (mental or physical), medical condition (cancer-related or genetic characteristics), genetic information (including family medical history), ancestry, service in the uniformed services (including protected veteran status), marital status, or any other characteristic protected by state or federal law.  The Office of Title IX, Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action (Title IX/EOAA) is dedicated to protecting these rights through:
promotion of the UC's values and policies, with training and education and awareness programs
responding to complaints and grievances of discrimination, harassment and retaliation
implementing UC and campus non-discrimination policies including the UC Policy on Sexual Violence and Sexual Harassment (SVSH)
overseeing compliance with laws relating to discrimination and harassment
ensuring that UCR protects the rights of those with disabilities including under the Americans with Disabilities Act and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act
coordinating campus affirmative action programs and producing the affirmative action plans.
Title IX/EOAA handles reports and complaints of discrimination, harassment, retaliation, and other conduct prohibited by anti-discrimination policies and the SVSH Policy.  You may also report incidents of bias, hate and intolerance.
Discrimination is adverse, unequal treatment, such as a personnel action, based on a protected characteristic.
Harassment is a form of discrimination, where the adverse treatment is unwelcome conduct based on a protected characteristic that is intimidating, hostile or offensive and so severe or pervasive that it creates a hostile environment.
Retaliation is adverse action taken against someone for filing a complaint, participating in a complaint resolution process, or engaging in another protected activity.
The full definitions are provided in UCR's Discrimination, Harassment & Retaliation Complaint and Resolution Policy.
To file a report or complaint, including anonymously (if desired):
make an online report of discrimination, harassment, bias, hate, sexual violence, or retaliation
Your report will be promptly reviewed by Office staff.  Typically, we will reach out to you or the person identified as having experienced the discrimination, harassment or retaliation with information and resources and to connect for an intake meeting if appropriate.  Our flowcharts and FAQs provide more information about our assessment and response process.
This reporting form may also be used to report violations of the SVSH Policy; visit the Title IX at UCR website to learn more about the SVSH Policy and programs.
UCR encourages students, faculty, and staff to contact the Office of Title IX, Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action with complaints and concerns, so that we have the opportunity to work to address the concern.  We also provide information about how you may report discrimination, harassment (including sexual violence) and retaliation to regulatory entities, outside of UCR.
Students may file complaints with the U.S. Department of Education’s Office for Civil Rights (OCR).  OCR has a website that explains how to file a discrimination complaint.  Other reporting options include:
U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights, Lyndon Baines Johnson Department of Education Building, 400 Maryland Ave., SW, Washington, DC 20202-1100 or ocr@ed.gov or (800) 421-3481, 800-877-8339 (TDD), or
U.S. Department of Education's San Francisco Office: (415) 486-5555, or ocr.sanfrancisco@ed.gov.
If you are a student employee and your complaint relates to your role as an employee, the options for employees may also be available to you.
the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing (DFEH) by using one of the three complaint methods described on their website.
the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), as explained on the EEOC's website.  The local EEOC office is located at Roybal Federal Building, 255 East Temple St., 4th Floor, Los Angeles, CA 90012.  The EEOC encourages complainants to schedule an intake appointment online using their portal.
the U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights, as described on their website.  Complaint options include online, by mail or phone at: U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights, Lyndon Baines Johnson Department of Education Building, 400 Maryland Ave., SW, Washington, DC 20202-1100 or ocr@ed.gov or (800) 421-3481, 800-877-8339 (TDD), or through the Department’s San Francisco Office: (415) 486-5555, or ocr.sanfrancisco@ed.gov.
Options for Residents and Fellows (UCR SOM and UCR Health)
Residents and Fellows may file a complaint related to a medical education program (for example, for failure to prevent or appropriately respond to sexual harassment) with the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME).
Patients may file a complaint with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office for Civil Rights, electronically through the Office for Civil Rights Complaint Portal , or by mail or phone at: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 200 Independence Avenue, SW Room 509F, HHH Building Washington, D.C. 20201 1-800-368-1019, 800-537-7697 (TDD). Complaint forms are available online.
Complaints may also be made to the California Department of Public Health’s Regional Office at 3901 Lennane Drive, Suite 210, Sacramento, CA 95834, (916) 263-5800, (800) 554-0354, (916) 263-5840 (fax).
Additionally, patients can file a complaint against a licensed medical professional, including physicians, nurses, psychologists and others through the California Department of Consumer Affairs. They can also visit this Consumer Affairs website, which will allow them to access websites to file complaints about any licensed professional in the State of California.
UCR will review and respond to all reports of hate, bias, harassment, and discrimination.
Anyone can report online to UCR's Office of Title IX, Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action, or through the UC Systemwide Intolerance Report Form.  Hate crimes should be reported to law enforcement.
Bias and hate incidents generally are conduct that targets or disparages people or groups based on actual or perceived race, color, ancestry, religion, ethnicity, national origin, gender, gender identity, age, disability, sexual orientation, or other protected characteristics or categories.  See our FAQs for more information on the relationship of hate, bias, and harassment.  For definitions of different types of bias and other acts of intolerance, visit the UC Climate website.
For more options and information about other campus resource offices and about where to file other types of complaints or reports, visit Help@UCR.
california advances commitment to pay equity and supporting women
UC and UCR policies and procedures relating to discrimination, harassment, and sexual violence
UC Policy on Discrimination, Harassment & Affirmative Action in the Workplace
Procedure for Discrimination, Harassment and Retaliation Complaint Resolution
900 University Ave.             Riverside, CA 92521
